Hey sir I have a question on software I am doing that timeline for john but I am trying name the identity the guys name for a event and the next event ha
s the same guys name as the first but it will not let me to name the second identity the same as the first identity is there a way around that or some
thing that I have to do to allow me to do it
The identity field must be unique, but you can use label instead
Ok thank u sir
Go to item properties and select label
Ok kewl
Is there a way to copy the entire event and paste it for the next?
Should be able to copy an paste anything on the chart, yes
Hmmm it will not allow me to I right click on the event hit copy and right click else where on the timeline and hit paste it just rehighlights the event
I was trying to duplicate
I think it duplicates in that exact physical location
See if it is stacked on other one
I tried to click on the top one and change the date and time but if it is stacking it moves the entire stack to that location then
Hmm guess u may have to recreate it then
Wait I remember how
Ok not a problem just checking
U copy it to a new chart, change the identity, then copy it back into your chart
Ok I'll give that a shot thank u
Yup
Yep that worked if the time increments are to close and it stacks the events on top of each other how do u spread them out?
Got it you have to drag with the arrow not the hand
Yes or unpinned them
Question when there are two people arguing would you show two different event bubbles and link them together with the description of the event
An argument is one event with two or more involved (linked) subjects
Last dance with mary jane tonight, u in? Gotta pass a piss test in a couple months so this be it for while
People should not be events
He should be entered as a regular entity
So when it shows me the male figure or female figure I shouldnt use that? What should I use?
Yes, but if u look at tabs the male and female can be events or other entity types
There are tabs above the icons
Ok so can I make the main person the event and then just add the associate under it almost like it is now but change the event below to a associate?
No I would only make incidents events
Make people standard entities and link them to events
Regular entities don't appear in squares
U only see the icon
Because people will be linked to multiple events
Ok so I shouldn't make the events with people how should I represent the event title and photo? Do u have a example that I can look off of to get an idea?
Ok
Or u can make him a timeline if he is linked to all the events
Ok so I should just make one associate and link then to all the different events
Hang on
Not quite all of them
Ok
Ok
Do u have a account that I can use?
Ok
Click add computer
Install software
Tell me when ready
Almost
Alright
It says no remote users are connected
I need ur login password. For security reasons, u can temporarily change it by ctrl alt del
Change it to temp pw then give me it
I've given u his email before, on march 3rd to be exact
I found email mentioning him but can't find his email lol
No worrys I'll look again for it
Just sent to u as outlook contact
Thank u sir
I never emailed it to u before, I wrote down his number lol
Just found email where I mention his name but no contact info
Wanna snort a line w/me?
Ahh ic
Yup lol
What time will u b here for dinner
When tim is done working on ur roommates car we r coming over together
If she needs it done with someone else present, she can contact John Doe and they can pay him big bucks to do it in front of both of them
I'll call her, what's her number?
I called her, it's all good now
Ok thank you sir
Question for ya sir I am not 100% sure on how to make it look nice I tried the premade template for the layouts it just makes it look worse or do I just
have to mess with it by adjusting one by one?
Yup, sucks
Dam that is a lot of adjusting how do u not make it look like a mess of lines just spread it out?
But wait. What version do u have?
Lol very carefully, or u take it off the timeline and space everything yourself
Version 8.5.1 and I think I will spend sometime spreading it lol last thing I want is a day and a half gone
Did you put subjects above and below the timeline if not do u think that it will not not look good if I did?
That is probably fine
Ok timelines are kind of a pain to do with all the different connections and being able to move it all around
Edit the objects and set them all to free
Then u can move them yourself
Ok I'll give it a shot
Hey u on the road whats ur eta
How did u get passed the data loss when you try to print it out on the plotter
Export as A3 or some other smaller paper type as a PDF. Print the PDF using adobe.
Will take away from the quality of the print?
Will that*
Not much. It makes high quality PDFs
Ok I'll give it a shot thank u
How do I shrink down the chart with out bringing down the font size? Right now it is 82 x 30 it's big
You just shrink it then blow it up as PDF to print it
Resolution is good
So do I have to go through all the font sizes and shrink them down to fit on a smaller page size or can I make it do that automatically?
Have you tried to call them for trouble support?
Yes
They couldn't do it either lol
No it shrinks it for you in page setup
U tell it to fit to whatever paper size and it will
Then export as PDF
Ok I think I found the problem for the export for me I have it set to custom 1 82x30 but everytime it exports as a PDF it defaults the custom 1 back to 8
.5x11 so I am going to see if I can't change the default printer size to the 82x30
It shows them PDF writer as a printer so does it select the options from there instead of the plotter? If so it would not recognize my custom setting for t
he plotter
Yep I think that is it
It shows me the paper sizes that it will export but I can not change any of them it just gives me a error when I try
It will not export a large PDF. Legal 11x17 or standard only
U just blow it up in adobe
Resolution is actually fine
I understand that but I am trying to make it where there isn't a foot of white on top of the chart then the time bar. It will allow me to export on the p
redesignated size paper but it will not allow me to do it with a custom size.
No custom sizes no
Why?
Cuz it sucks
But u can tell it to fit in that size in page setup
Ok is there a way to cut out the big blank area?
I got that
Move the chart up towards the top edge
Then all the runoff will be on the bottom
Ok I'll give that a shot. Do u just deselect the center on page option and select everything and move it?
Yup
Ok
Thank u
no
NP
How's class?
Good
I probably need to stop txting now and pay attention
Ok take it easy
What are you up to tonight?
I'm in chi-town
Awwww Bummer!
Question for ya where on word can you see what grade level you are typing at?
Go to tools then spelling and grammar check
It first must be enabled in settings
Alright do u go under options?
Go to word options under home button in word
Click on proofing tab
Select boxes for show readability statistics
Then grammar and style?
Then under tools do spell check, u have to thru all the errors an ignore and at the end it will show u
Under fletsch something or other
Do u see it?
If not let me remote in
Sweet got it thank you
No prob. We use that at school lol
Lol nice
Most grad papers are 9-12th grade
Many undergrad are 7-10
Lol steve wanted to check his paper that he wrote and I couldnt remember how that worked. I never use it because I am afraid to know lol I am better at ri
ghting in equations tables and graphs
Most tech people are. Hence grade level readings lol
Nice
Cigar event at the lounge tonight
Is it ok if it's closer to 9pm?
I need to be heading home at 10 or 1030, for tomorrow. should we reschedule?
Nahh, we can still do 8:30. I was mostly giving ourselves extra padding, but now I'm confident we won't need it
Cool, I will be there
U and amber doing anything tonight?
Yeah sorry man, just got back in town
No prob
What are you up to tonight?
I will be in aurora till about 8:30, so free after that
You wanna go to three brothers on your way back?
Sounds good to me
Sweet! My roommate Tim is coming too!
Kewl
So Nate is gonna come out too! The day has finally arrived! :)
Kewl
Aww yeah!
No took day off
Why?
Can I call?
Yeah
Hey u guys want to meet up any earlier by chance?
Well we are going to bob's house, as soon as that is done we can meetup. Are you not going to aurora?
Maybe not
But I will definitely meet u tonight at three bros
Ok well i was gonna say you are welcome to come to bob's house too
Oh yeah
We'll see
It is any 4 books for $16 lol
Lol, damn! Wonder if they got any good neuro stuff
We are headed out now.
K see u in a few
Umm PCP
Did you see that dude who ate his own crap on bath salts?
Muahaha
I am heading over. Thought I hit snooze...
No prob lol
See u soon
Give me a call.not sure whats going on yet.
K
Want to wood today
Hey sorry took nap
Long nap
Lol
Did you want to do the wood?
I could
Lemme see what us Goin on
Ok let me know so I can call mike
Can we do it tomorrow
He goes to bed about 5.
Am
Ok so when is best time?
Tomorrow
Today or next weekend. Have to talk to him.
Ok kewl
I am free all day tomorrow
Sorry man, I laid down and crashed for several hours
My bad
Any plans?
Yeah, what ru doing tomorrow?
Prob staying in and studying, busy tonight?
Yeah at friends house
Borders has nothing left lol
Goin fast lol
Hey I think I got a virus on my pc. Are you in the area today where u might be able to look at it?
Yes but not sure what is going on today
Ok..not sure what I should do first, never had a virus before. It is mailing all my contacts
That might just mean ur mail got hacked
Change password asap
Use strong password
Okay I will do that now. If you have some time later to take a look at it, please let me know. Thanks
K text me around 1 or I will forget lol
Ok :)
You and amber wnt to go to bdubs in chicago tnght
Not sure yet
K
K
Nce
Ugh. Never hit acid with pranksters. BAAAD trip.
Hey can u send d screen shots of ur part to me? Tom needs our team's screen shots
Restarted computer and everything is on there!
Good to hear! You can now breath a sigh of relief lol
A rather short one, for i am amidst many, many finals...
Mostly papers for me, not really any tests
ivory bath salts, now comes in zombie variety
Same, have't had any tests yet
Hey u wanna meet me an skip up for lunch?
Where
Where are you?
here
What about Family restaurant?
What time?
Now or whenever works for u
I'm open now. Eat food now.
Ok see in a few
K
Hw many people are u bringng
Just me
I need some vikes, this pain sucks
Yes and I know where it is
Where is that at?
Hey sir we are at old Chicago if u want to come out
Kewl
Happy Easter sir
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Same to you
Thanks, u too!
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Happy Easter :)
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
You too!
Happy Easter
You too man! :)
Happy Easter
Happy Easter
Thanks! Happy Easter to U too!
Happy Easter
Happy Easter to you man! How's everything going with you?
Going well, how about u and the family?
Great! Have you heard/seen that I'm a dad now?
Yup, but I forgot your child's name and gender lol
James, why?
Kewl man
Yep. How's your family, wife, mom and brothers?
Doin well. amber is about to finish school, mom is well, tim is havin fun in chicago, Joe hasn't broken his neck yet, and amber came off birth control. So we might be joining the parent club...
And to you.
Awesome! That all sounds great man!
Didn't get that message
What message?
An mms came to my phone from u
Yes I probably said happy Easter earlier
Oh ok
text me back when you get this
K
Hey team. I will be logging on from home tonight at around 730pm. Chat with you then.
Me too
Did u get a chance to send me ur screen shots?
Forgot, will do so in half hour or so
Are u still doing the search functionality?
Yes, but it doesn't work lol
Do u wanna coordinate with Joe? He said u can hit him up
K
Can't get back in class
Tell he to approve me
Thx
Np
Hey u wnt to cme up to bdubs in cedar point and wtch the bulls and hawks game wth me tnght
Hey sorry was busy
Thats ok
What are you doin next sat?
The 7th, usually just church. Why?
Wanted to see if you and amber wanted to come have dinner with me and my family. A few other friends may come too. It is kind of a graduation dinner too! :)
Sweet! I am not sure, it'd probably be around 7ish, so yeah whatever you guys can work out. :)
May be bonfirin tonight if you are interested?
Already made plans sorry
Awww ok
I have a slow MAC. Do you have any utilitys that I can run?
No but u can clean it up similar to windows
I found a bad homepage and a dvds dns setting I didn't like.it's running faster now.
Still at dinner, in a good conversation. Didn't forget about you.
Ok..we are making smores now but then probably going to head to mateys in cedar point
Ok we will text when we leave
Hey team, I won't be in class tonight cos of a business meeting.
No prob
I need to ask you about a javascript question later thru email. Look out for it
K
Hmm can't get in on adobe connect
You free thurs?
After 9pm
Perfect, wanna go to three brothers again?
Emailed ya
Kewl
Sorry for not responding, got sidetracked
I think 3 brothers will work on thurs
Sweet man! :)
 got a minute give me a call
In a few
K
Don't forget about three brothers tonight! :)
I'll be there
Sweet!
Sweet!
Crap I forgot to call u
Just now remembered
Sorry about that
maybe tonight give me a call
you still looking for a house
We'd have to sell ours, but maybe
I will talk to you tomorrow about.
K
Won't make it tonight
Haven't left yet
I might need to renig
Ok can u make sure u send ur stuff to joe so he can integrated everything?
Trying to text him to find a time to meet up with him
He said he will be at his bar sat night for sure
Aww, well we haven't left either
No? What time would u get there?
Ok kewl
Like 20 min
Ok I will come then
Be like 30 min for me
Ok amber and I are on our way
Nice we re just leavin lol
Jenny and i are going to Mel's Place tonight, it's an awesome thai place by the mall, they're having a jazz night. If u and amber are free your we
lcome to join us
Maybe we can all meet at my place at 5, i made reservations for 7, when the show starts, we can check out the mall for a bit once we get there, sound good?
Sounds good
Almost there
Coo
Van is back and key in spot. I put 6 in gas. Thanks again
Kewl, no prob
We are going to Livios at 730 if you and amber wanted to join. :)
We won't be able to. But thanks. Joe can't meet me up to merge our code till 8 pm
Ok thats cool
What's up? Was in church when u called
See what u where up to
Gonna be doing homework at a bar with a classmate
Would be boring for u lol
K
K
Are you guys free on the 21st?
Dunno, prob ambers family has sumthin not sure
Ok. That will be my last weekend in town so I might have a going away party
Ok kewl, let us know when
Was there supposed to be something attached? This is Bob
No, I got txt from someone saying they changed number but my phone replies all to group Ezra
Texts, not Ezra
oh, I think that was a text Mike from the guitar group. Something about his cell.
Oh ok
See, this is why txting sucks. If I called you, you would know who I am. It's Josh from guitar group! I gave you mu new# when we were at bw3.
Is what I thought u gave me
I deleted this one
Well undelete it!?
Lol just did
Thx Bob, sorry about the mixup.
Ok. I got the forms onto the site but it's not sending me the emails once they are filled and submitted. Can't figure out where I'm going wrong.  HELP (
when u get a chance)
I cam see that they are submitted on the plug-in itself.
My login doesn't work on 192.168.4.4 arg, don't worry about it tonight
got glitter?
your icon suck
:-)
Jenny's having some ppl over tonight for dinner and drinks, u and amber are welcome to come by!
Awesome thanks, we'll see how grading and final homework goes lol
Where and what time?
Nobody came lol, what u guys doing?
Homework lol
U have a ton?
I just have to grade a few more things, not too much. amber has to finish her paper.
Want me to call when I'm done?
U guys potentially want to do something?
amber no, but I am prob down for sumthin in a lil bit
Know any good fishing spots?
Nope, nothing public
Just finished, but I'm pretty tired man
What are the dates you are going to DC again?
feeling sim patico?
the lounge event tonight
Cool will try to make it
U hungry?
Had a big pizza earlier, where are ya thinken?
I am hungry .. Munchies haha .. Joint and a burrito please
I'm game for whatever
Same here, any ideas?
Hmm, what about bdubs?
Which one?
I like by u the best
chicago?
chicago, not far
Coo, what time u going to be up there? Is amber joining us?
Amber is out of town
I will leave in a bit. Want me to call when close to ur house or pick u up on the way?
Sure
K cu in a few
Have ya left yet?
Yup on 30
Passing Columbia
Yo, u still down for grappling?
I have some work to get caught up on today, next week for sure. When do u go back to school?
Tomorrow lol
I come out there once in a while due to gas prices and didnt come early hope i did not a fend you if you dont want me at your home i wont come again love dad
Not a big deal, but call before you come over
I am gonna head to OC around 9:30
Hmmm I think I am going to stay home I'm already in pajamas and comfortable thank you though
Lol k no prob
Thank you though
So apparently u know Jane Doe too lol
Small world
Very small. She speaks very highly of you. You should be proud everyone that knows you talks of how wonderful you are.
It makes me feel good to be related. I hope all is well. We still have to get together.
Lol and  the same for you. Bill's a good friend.
Yeah we do
amber finally graduated so at least one of us is no longer quite as busy lol
Nice. I think she was working on plans with jennifer.
K good. Scheduling isn't my thing usually. Even tho we have a shared calendar, she likes to keep important stuff in her head and not on the calendar for some reason lol
Yo where u guys at?
U hanging out with Mike and Marvin?
We're at b w s eating
U gonna be there awhile, and if so, which bdubs?
Yeah
We are gng up to hooters
K
U cmmng up
Yeah
K
Foggy
the lounge event tonight, drew estate
Kewl
Bonfire. My place. Right now.
Can't. Got the Kid. Goin to get pizza. Thanks for thinking of me...the day before the world ends! Ha!
Lol
He can come too if u guys get bored
Bonfire. Our place. Right now.
I'm at work until 11
K no prob, txt when done if u aren't too tired
Yes ma'am
Sir ;)
Lol. Sorry
bonfire still going on
I'm getting off in 25mins. Are there still alot of people at your house?
Yup
I'm just leaving the city now. So I should be there by 1230-1
K not sure if we will still be Goin strong then lol
But we might be :)
Me steve and jim r still kicking
I just went home. I could barely stay awake driving.
Lol no prob
U gng tnght
Not sure yet
K
Got any plans for later?
Tons, but thinking of doing another bonfire later lol
Cool, we're down :)
If u guys want, we could even do something at Jenny's, whatever u want
Yeah we have to go to a going away party for a little while then will call u when we leave
We will probably start the bonfire at 9pm
Bonfire tonight at 9pm (again)
Bonfire tonight at 9pm (again)
If you have any next weekend, let me know. My youngest isn't super sociable and I like to be here with him.
No problem, will let u know
Bonfire tonight at 9pm if u guys wanna come, we'll have some hydro
Bonfire tonight at 9pm (again)
Just got done with the picnic tables.I'm not moving to far from the house. Thanks anyways.
Lol no prob
I work until 11. I'll be there, I promise!
Lol no biggie.
U guys out there?
Come on out
Yes
I just left work. I'll be there by midnight.
Going strong
Yes!!
U still down for grappling?
Yeah, when's good?
How about 11:45 or so
Sounds good
Think i can meet with ya today or tomo for a bit? I'm having some fustrating software problems, i'm guessing it's easily fixable though
Can u help me recall everything that I help you with so I can make this list for Mel
I will be back in office in a little bit
Ok
Waiting at light
Yeeeha love new orleans love amy
Hey! So how you lookin today?
Later this evening could work
Cool, bob's house gets out round 9.
Hey, I may have to cancel for tonight, I just found out that a friend of mine is celebrating his birthday after bob's house and wanted me to come. What are you doi
ng tomorrow night?
No prob
Count me in for food today
I am coming in
K
What are you up to tonight?
Relaxing at home
Plans may change on our trip in June
Are you still able to come from 10-19?
That would be two full weekends
We would leave early Friday the 10th and come back late the 19th
Thats cool, you interested in seeing movie tonight? Ok, what's gonna change?
No not tonight
And we would take u to your house the 12th probably and then pick u up again on the 17th or 18th
Depending on when we decide to head back
Oooo, so you are gonna leave earlier? I may have to check on that
Yes because we want to go to visit friend in PA on the 12th, we want to surprise the dr. who is a friend of mine
Ahh ok, I may gave to either leave late and meet you put there, or leave early, I am not sure I can miss two Sundays in a row.
K
I'll let you know, after I talk to dr. mike
Well we were pretty much going to take u to ur house there cuz we want some alone time on our vacation lol
Lol no I know, i'm just saying I may go one way with you guys instead of both.
Lol gotcha
Hey guys, just wanted to let you know I should be all moved into my new place by the 14th or 15th. Look forward to hanging out in PA. Let me know when you have
figured out details for your trip :)
Will do
BOB!! What are you doing? Jane decided to have a BBQ at her house tonight. I'm headed there now. If you're free, come on down! I think Mike is coming. Br
yan. I think Michelle.
I can't make it tonight, sorry. Already made plans. Thanks for the invite tho
As it stands, we will probably shoot to visit you on Friday the 17th
Sounds good, give me a call sometime beforehand and we can figure out details :)
Sounds good
You gonna be around this afternoon so I can drop off my computer?
Yeah, susie was here earlier too
 She's a loser. She's ignoring me today so I don't come next door and bug her. She probably has to get to the beach by noon...  I'll be down around 3...I hope.
Lol k
I'm on my way down there.
Bob, got Win7 installled. It's all good. My kid has a portable 500GB HDD so I'll be by Fri morn to copy the files. Thanks for your help!
Cool no prob
Be sure to install antivirus. I recommend software, which is free
What about AVG?
Thats good too
the lounge event tonight
Cool, but my cuzins r coming over
Jenny and i are going to oriental buffet later for sushi, u and amber are welcome to join
Near Chicago, probably not today
Feel like going to flosmore station tonight?
At a restaurant now lol
Tried calling u the other day
I need to know ur plans
We r leaving Friday morning
Well our resteraunt is better! Lol
Yeah, I am not gonna be able to make it, there is just too much going on. Hopefully next time it will work out better
Ok no prob
Ok, well I'll be here for a bit, so just try to get here as soon as you can and we should be able to get you all taken care of before the interview, this will o
nly take about 10 to 15 min
Huh?
Ahhhh shoot wrong person lol
Lol figured
I owe u lunch. U in the area?
At home waiting for the ac guys
Gotcha
Dude! So did you get a message from sarah about playing for the summer retreat?
Yeah
Probably can, just not sure yet
That would be sweet!!! I am leading along with Sarah this time, and my room mate tim will be on electric so it will rock!!
Kewl
Yeah man!!
U want to go out later on at bdubs tnght
Can't
K hw about tmrrw nght
U called me a minute ago but no one talked
Lol
No I am out of town for awhile starting tomorrow
Hey, can you dome a favor while your out there?
Maybe, what?
Can you pick me up a case of yuengling to bring back?
What is it?
Beer :) very good beer! you should pick your self up some too!
Ok but can u text me in a few days to remind me?
And it is actually pretty cheap
Yeah!
Sweet thanks!!! Also I am excited you are coming with us in July!!
Me too ;)
Sweet!!
Can you give Jessica a call. It's about your cards
K
U got any plans for tonight?
Out of town
YEEEEEEEEEEEEEEES!!!! :)
What do you think?
Not bad, but nothing to rave about lol. Tastes like Killians
Oh it is delicious, just wait, it will grow on you!! :)
Nahh.
Lol well just don't drink any when you bring me back a case! :) lol
I won't ;) it's hard to justify a case of beer in a vehicle  that is missing cans/bottles to a police officer
Lol
Help. Outlook is not asking for a certificate. Darrin can get to his email on his browser. Any ideas?
Hmm settings are right?
Is he saying yes when the popup comes up?
Did he accidentally say no and block it?
Everybodys is doing the same thing. The warning is not poping up.
Ic I will hit up jim smith
Thanks
Doesn't work on my phone either
They must be down
Ok
Fyi outlook just came back up. Thanks
Cool
Hey guys, just wanted to reach out and see what ur plans were for Saturday. Were u planning on just coming by for the day or were u planning on staying overnigh
t? Need to know in order to work out work schedule
Just the day, we have a hotel for the night
U staying in harrisburg or another city? I might have to work midnight shift on Saturday so I am trying to figure out details
Staying in chambersburg, pretty close
I think that is about 30 minutes away. You guys are welcome to stay at my house if you want, I have two extra rooms and I won't be home
Thanks for the offer, but remember my bro works for Holiday Inn, so we're all good ;)
nt. I think I have to go into work at 6pm :(
Sorry for all the questions, what time are u arriving on Saturday (ballpark)?
Hey, don't forget the yuengling! :)
;)
Awwwwww yeah!! :D
the lounge event tonight
Still in DC
So we are aiming to be in Harrisburg area late tonight so that we can link up tomorrow. What time did u want to link up?
Anytime is good with me. If you guys come by early enough I can take you to gettysburg or hershey if u want. Just let me know whatever works for u guys
We have been to Gettysburg but not Hershey
Well u get off work at 3am and have to go back at 7, so whenever works for you. When do u normally wake up?
I will most likely be up by 9am.
Let's shoot for 11am
Where are you guys staying? I will email you directions from there to my house tonight
Residence Inn in pittsburgh, PA.
Haha that's where I stayed for a few weeks
Lol nice. Got best rate there
I will email directions in a few, it will take you about 25 minutes to get to my house
K
Good news ... I got put of working tomorrow :)
Just now waking up... Lol. We got in late
No problem. Take your time, I don't have a curfew anymore :) lol. I am up and ready, going to run to bank so just text me when u are on ur way
Leaving now
Headed home now .. be there in a sec, sorry
K just got here
Tuned up the drum set for you lastnight over at ralphs, it sounds sooooooo sweet!!!!!
What cymbals are you planning on bringing?
Mine
But which cymbals?
Sabian AA hats, Zildjian K hand-hammered ride
Does he have crash cymbal(s)?
Not really any good ones, you don't have any?
Btw, what time are you getting back?
In about an hour lol
Nice! Did you remember the beer?
;)
Lol sweet! timmy and I are in the area, would you mind if we came and picked it up?
I am not home yet. Shipment tax applies :P
Lol I meant when you got there, is that meaning you want some beer? Lol, btw how much did it cost?
Like 10
12 pk cans
In chicago area
Sounds good! Just let me know when you get back.
K
We r home now
Ok cool, we'll be by soon
Hope u guys made it home okay. Had fun hanging out, hope u had a good bday
Yup got home a couple hours ago. Very fun bday, thanks!
Good :) look forward to hanging out soon.
U2!
You free tonight to meet and practice?
We have father's day with my dad sorry, and am in training tue-thur evenings lol
I could text when my dad leaves and see what time it is, nut no guarantees
Lol ok
Three brothers tonight?
Possibly. The longer it's on the less likely. Kill it asap.
Can't
After training?
Are you at work?
Not anymore. On way to ohio
Ok
Three brothers after the jam night?
They've got some new beers there! :)
Maybe depends on if amber wants to
Sweet!! Is she coming tonight?
Most likely
Excellent! Yeah, they aren't feeding us tonight btw just a heads up
K
Lol ok, so if you and amber both want to come out to.three brothers, then Mike said he and his gf would probably come out too, but only if you both come so andrea h
as someone to.talk to lol
Lol we'll see
Lol ok
When are u guys planning on going on that chicago beer tasting?
Dunno I'd have to ask amber
Thx
He is not there yet either lol
Just got ur message sorry
Hey bonfire
Late notice I forgot a few ppl
Hey! Are you doin the 4th this year?
Of course
Sweet! Can I party with you huts this year?
Guys*
Yeah it is an open invite on fb
Lol nice! Is it at yours or.your moms?
Moms
Word
My bro made invite. I plan on leaving fb if google+ takes off
Lol ok well I'll plan on comin down there then, what is your.work plan for next Friday?
Taking day off
Ok cool, not sure when we are leaving yet, but I will let you know
K
Hey bob, if your not busy come join me up at the lounge, there's a cigar event going on today
Sorry I missed cigar event. What u up to tonight?
Nada, u?
Mmm... Guiness, fire and distant fireworks shows. Most excellent lol
Nix on the bonfire. Friend invited me to chill on the lake in chicago. Ur welcome to join me. Call me asap if u want to come otherwise I will assume ur busy
Hey just lettng u knw that i am hme safe
Kewl glad to hear
Yeah thanks for inviting me over had fun talk at u later
Hey we were thinking of heading to her parents' in about 45 minutes
Wanna meet up at our place?
Sure
Ok probably shoot to Be here soon
Hey! What time is everything going down?
If you got a minute can you call me.
Thanks for taking me along yesterday, it was a blast! Tell amber i say thanks too!
Bob, is that you making all that noise down the street?
Lol yup
We r done
That is not us now.
Figured that was you.hopefully they'll start.sheesh
Those suck compared to yours!
Yes, about 40 minutes ago we did our grand finale. We had about 34 mortars go off timed about 1 second each. Plus screaming Saturn missiles. Plus quarter stick.... Lol
I believe it
U get there ok? I could hardly hear u earlier plus I always have to ask jim how to get there
Taking cover down there? Lol
Nah we're by st. john
Oh ok lol
Lol
Now your up a creek with out a paddle!
Lol
Hey! So we are leaving at 1 on Friday!
K kewl
Do you think your van can make it down to near Elgin? And, would you be willing to drive?
No and no lol
Well, apparently we are being asked to chip in and cover gas on our own. So I will help cover the cost
I'd rather take Honda then
Ok, i think I'll ask tim to.rise with Lisa and you and I will ride together. That will give us more room.
Ride*
K
Need to pack list: Phone charger Pillows Blankets Sheets Phone charger Bible Towel Toiletries And...... Phone charger!! :p
Lol thx
Hang on
What's your address?
Thanks
Mp
Any plans?
I am out of town this weekend actually lol
At a camp near elgin
U can hit amber up tho and see if she is doing a bonfire or anything
What u up to tnght
Out of town
K
Bad storms coming in. Get timmy ready for pops. It's here.
Ok thanks
Hey are u gng to jims for kareeoke party
I think so yeah
K when is it
Dunno yet lol. Probably all day
K does jim knw when it is
I am at work
Will call u in a few
K
It is not till next weekend
K so the twnty third
Yeah
Do i need to brng anythng food or drnks
Dunno
K let me knw when u fnd out
hey i got kicked out of my dadas house last night. had no sleep and im at a hotel now.
Well, you may not have a job now.
Still working on your laptop in the students office. Are you still around?
No, I'll be back Friday around 10am.
Can I keep your laptop and work on the issue?
is able to install the Banner and Advisor Query on the Windows side.  So yes keep it and enjoy.
Yes, I thought that I indicated I wouldn't be taking it with me tomorrow so you would have time to do the VMWare stuff and then contact Tim Smith to see if he
I will do my beat to get it functioning and over to Jake. See you on Friday
Ok, thanks.
Hey thanks for the google plus invite. Saw ambers thing on fb and then asked for an invite. Then thought to check my gmail and voila. You had already sent one.
I invited u before I invited amber lol
I won't tell. Lol. I am gonna hop on in a minute and check it out
Kewl
I sent you an email you need to read.
i tried to text and call earlier. i got kicked out of my dads and i'm at a hotel. i dont have internet. i'll be there tomorrow morning.
You may not have a job. When you get in, read your email and then set up appointment to speak with me.
You can come on campus to remove anything that is yours from the office and sign your time card any time after 9:30 am today. If you have in your possession anything that belongs to the university, you are to bring it with you at that time.
No. There is a problem with vmfusion accepting vm's from network. I may have to upgrade you to vmfusion. In the meantime, it's 4:20Ä
Ok, got some grass?
I am trying different things getting closer I hope. Now let's go smoke a bowl.
Is the problem on my Macbook? PS I'm ready to light up
Maybe needed to totally remove the old version of VMWare before loading the new one?
Yes. It is. I am going to download the news version of vmfusion now. You will have to upgrade to full version it works in 30 days.
You could also check with Hector Chavez  What is 30 days?
Why use the trial version?
The trial version of fusion expires?
Upgrade. I cannot just upgrade it too big of version difference.
What do the rest of our faculty have, version wise?
No one is on campus. Don't know at this time. Your MAC is newer than most in department.
Ok
Tim Smith fixed it for you for$0.00 and no trial ware version. I can drop it off with Jake in the mornings for banner and access query. I am going to hire him on a trial basis.
Ok! Sounds like he may be a keeper. Now to find someone else? to staff the lab?
You free Monday night?
No, tue-thur is better next two weeks
Ok sweet, Tuesday night, flosmore?
That should work
Ok sweet!
My battery is dying.
I'll be in around 4pm today
Ok.
Ok see you soon
Grant Smith is installing software now if all goes well should be.done soon. Trying to discover up number and getting mapped drive.
Done. Heading to Susie's office.
Doing anything tonight?
Yeah, at buddy's house in chicago
U want to have a fire tnght
No going to a party
K
Nice
Looks like the hooks works
Please call me if you are still at the store. The meat I brought was apparently rancid inside the sealed package.
I have nothing else to feed the kids
Damn thatsbig!
Yes indeed
Nice job.can you bring in your code reader for cars tomorrow. I need to reset a code on the truck.
Will do, I will probably come in late tomorrow to take care of some stuff at home
Sounds good. Thanks
I sent you a preliminary image of the network layout with just a few missing pieces. I will show you tommorow.
Ok.
We still on for tomorrow?
Yeah fo sure
What time you wanna go? they have food there so we can eat dinner there
Ok, around 6:30?
Sounds good man! You wanna meet at my house?
No it will be faster if I meet u there. I am coming from maryland
Oh ok that works, you know where it is?
Nope
But I know where chicago is lol
It's in the old train station, bring some of those percs to share!
What's the name of it?
Lol that is the name of it. :)
Oh ok lol
Be right there.
Still can't get in
This Saturday grandma and I are going out of town with Amanda and Tom. We will not be home until later Saturday night sometime. Plan accordingly.
6:30 right?
Or is it now? Lol
630
K kewl
U here?
Did you make it home before the meta train/car accident?
got off in Whiting & Jim came to the rescue    whew
Glad to hear that. They showed it one the news lead train derailed.
I am on the store, getting toilet paper. No reception. What's up?
Coming out to visit and pick up a package. Do we need to bring our own dinner?
Please
No package was delivered before we left. It is raining here.
Package is damaged from transit, I hope my coke isn't damaged!
What time did you leave & where are you? No rain here at all
You goin to jennys thing tonight?
Not sure right now
You goin late?
Depends when I am done here
Could end up working all night
Time to turn on the deck lights! ;)
Lol then I'd end up going slower!
Hey did u find out about tmrrw
Will call in a few
K
Sorry to bother you did u find out whats gng on tmrrw
So what's the word?
Everything still kickin at the club?
I haven't gone yet, are you going?
Probably about to head that way
Not gonna make it
Lol now you tell me, I just got here....
Sorry lol. S'all good
U will still have a good time lol
Yeah...... not sure about that..... I don't know anyone else here.... :/
Can you tell me if the case you went to work on today involved a 27 year old man (approx) by the name of John Doe. I promise jot to ask anything more.
It was a suspected gang related homicide, more to be released soon
Bob Doe is victim (deceased)
Sweet!
Ok thanks. A cousin of mine has a friend named John Doe who died yesterday,Chicago police investigating it as a homicide. She has been trying to find put what happened. Thanks for letting me know.
Are they still havng the party
Dont forget dadde computor please and thank you take care of beautiful wife after  computor p
I think so bow is weather
Still in bed
Ok let me knw if thngs change
Need€ reefer
Napping
Fresh chilly on stove
Call me dad
Later
Is it urgent?
Yes
At symphony orchestra at central park by house if you have time let me no on computor
Ok sorry busy
Cool man
Mike came over and we were learning social media stuff
I need to put application in for bobk  jmc steel peoriod com io dont no how to put in applacation in comp
Timmy wants to talk with you and Sara.
When?
Hey what was the name of the lady that sang that song thats supposed to be very funny jim was tellng me about it
Bonnie raitt total eclipse of the heart parody
K thanks
Works now
I just log into the AP.
It worked lol
Must of been a glitch.
I have copys of phone on computor need y fixed
Huh?
Call me
Thank you i was shocked to see timmy he got bean bag game from down stairs n
Thank you for your help im very gratful one day at a time
No prob
U guys going to amber's parents tomo, if so can i come along?
Yeah man. Want to meet up around 3pm?
Yeah, cigars?
Sure
Is ted's dad bringing the prostitutes and the powder?
What? Lol, he talks....
At the lounge
Timmy called. They are on their way home. Staying in Kentucky. Jenny says they will be at Friday on Sunday at 6pm. Said to tell you and daddy Michael that he loves you both and see you day after tomorrow.
Hey ur garage door is open. It is 11PM. If I don't hear from you in the next few minutes I will try to shut it. Didn't want to wake u up by calling.
Closed ur garage
Thanks brother
No prob
U may want to bring swim trunks
Sure thing
I got wrist bands for lulu and cupcake
Thank you.
Have easy call me on my cell. Asap - blow arrived
Sara needs to call.me.
You wanna go to chicago again tonight?
No hanging out
Ah ok
Hey was wonderng if jim is havng a kareoke party saturday
Dunno
Ok can u please find out for me
K
Thanks i apprcate it
Nope
When is he havng anther one
Dunno I'll keep u posted
Ok thanks u want to go out tnght fr sme drnks
No we got hanging out tonight, u can come if u want
What do u gt tnght
local bar
Oh k
Where is it at
Got it!  Look forward to working with you!
Kewl, u2
Been sick doing all right today going to meeting at12oo noon
K
How is mindy this morning after bumping her head last night? Any goose egg?
She is fine from what I can tell.
Good. timmy is worried about her and wanted to call.
Fine
Too early to call. She is gone
That OS why I sent text message instead.
We are on the way, meet at your house our Amanda's?
On our way to the fair
What tme is jim planng on havng us over
Once again, it is not set in stone
And I may not be going anyways
We are at the fairgrounds. Please let us know where to meet up. We are parked by the livestock and walking into the fair.
We are inside behind the industrial building. South east enterance
Ok mght nt ether
At mouse game. It's next to ferris wheel
At mouse game. It's next to ferris wheel
We are at the mouse game
Location? You are apparently not at the mouse game I am at
Are you still thinking of coming out tonight?
Nope not now sorry. I gotta fix mike's guitar teacher's computer lol
Ok I'm still out at the picnic.
K kewl
Well I will let u know when I am done and just see what ur up to
Ok
I will call u later when I know what's going on
Ok
We r outside the men's washroom, follow your nose
Ok
FYI I'm home now. If Mike is with you invite him too. I have meatballs,  cupcake and brownies.:-D
Mmm
chiva is a magical goat€ that I shoot up
Nice lol
I eat pizza now
Do you know what's required for that admin job at school? Was going to apply this week. You smoking a doobie?
Not really. Have not read it. I think it is for the IT department. of course!
Ok. I'm guessing that's a different department than you? Can you give me any specific contacts and would it help to use you as a reference?
I love you dad smile
I love you more and longer
Me love you long time
Prove it when you taking me out for dinner
How about we cook dinner instead
And you eat it with chopsticks
On my way
Joke
Yew, I can give you an employee referral. I will see if it is working for Mike Smith
Hey its miguel, was wondering if u where gonna  be in the office today my computer is really acting up was wondering if I could have u look at it
Yeah sure, bring it by around 10
K thnx
How is Michael holding up?  Need to see your face and soon!  Love you!  lucy
If you want a little boy you were a bountet to bed if she wants girl she werarse bountet night night your educateed
Bob, do you have or can you get a copy of software? We have a disk but not the program. Or maybe someone has a copy we can "borrow"?
I don't have it. I'll ask mike
Michael is not doing well at all. The death was sudden and unexpected from what I understand. His mom was only 50 and apparently had a bought of pneumonia, went to the doctor, he ran test, and sent her home. I guess she died in her husbands arms at work. He cannot go home for two reasons, no passport / could not return and no money. I am so sorry that he cannot be there.
I'm sorry to hear that!  My aunt had a mini stroke yesterday but seems to be ok and no permanent damage.
Oh my. Not a very good week thus far. Hope she continues to improve. Give mom a big from me.
Thanks~you guys take care of Michael too
Rebout computor cant get in old program
What Program, specifically?
Say a prayer for a mircle tonight and sarales cakesme to work i am geeting good at this art work
K
How are you doing today, son. I hope you are finding some peace and comfort with all that has happened. Stay tough and we will make it through this.
Thanks ma...
I love you and am worried about you.
Ill be ok... promise
Mom is at chicago hospital for observation of high blood pressure.
Keeping mom over night for observation.
Sorry just checked.my.phone.oh no is she going to be alright?when did this all come.up.with her?
We have been here since 9 pm. They are keeping her over night.
Oh ok.thanks for.letting us know.keep us up dated.tell her get better and we love her.call if u need.anything.
Gram / mom is home.
My mom is home.
That's good news hows she doing?thanks for letting us know whats going on.
She is better. Still not sire why her blood pressure shot up so high. We see the doctor on Monday.
the lounge cigar event tonight
Shooting to be there
Not gonna make it. Went to Jack and Jane's and we are just gonna chill Herr
Here*
We got ur shorts tho
Gotta link up this weekend
Sounds good
Whatcha up to today?
About to go for a run, a little work and no plans for later, hbu?
Gotta finish writing quizzes for class I'm teaching then nothing later
Cool, wanna do something?
Yeah
I think it is going to rain, so probably just chill here, maybe play a game or something
Otherwise a bonfire
Sounds good
Hungry for zucchini stew
Did u eat yet?
Nope
I was thinken of picken up some panera
K
I am headin home now, wanna come over after u get panera?
Sure, do u guys have some zucchini stew over there?
Absolutely
Ur more than welcome to have dinner with us
When will be over, we are hoping to eat soon?
In a minute, picking up coffee
K kewl
Roses are red violets stink your dad is beautiful to yotu smile see me before i become angle flying over yoto dad
Leaving now
Ok heading over there
We are here
Call me when you have time
K
What time you get off
Late
How is your mom?  lucy
She is doing good. Strange situation that we have no answer for. She sees the Dr today.
Keep me posted and I hope all goes well~love you!
Love you too. I will keep you posted.
We'll see u at noon at cantina in evergreen park, il
See you there.
Running late, order without me
K
Me too running late
This is Bill. Who ordered the server licenses?
What server licenses?
It looks likely that our server license comes with license choices that u can make after the purchase:-)  that might make things easier
Ok. I have a meeting from 9:30 to 11:30 I think. If you need me I will ne available via text messages.
Prof is in her office.
You let your insulted cup in my office.
Whoops. Ill grab it tomorrow
Traffic is gridlocked, we aren't going to beat you there. Going to exit highway asap.
I will go get timmy and meet you all there.
Ok, we are almost there
We are at a table. What do you want in your pizza?
Hope your a live see i care i might be dead some one else could be texing four my courpse
Creepy
I no that what make me unique
U guys have anything going on today?
Wanna come over around 9pm?
Sure, what u guys doing?
Prob just hang out, if it dries off enough maybe sit in yard
Sounds good, if not we can always garage it
Exactly
FYI Karaoke is now in  mikes garage.
K
Anytime after 7
K
See what time we get out of church
Ok
?
Row.row row your boat!!!!
Pic of kids pretending to row a boat.
You are not wanted you tinder the.pic but I guess it did not work.out?
No pic came through
Why am I rowing a boat?
I hate this auto correct. The message was to read "you ate not, wanted you to see the picture."
U still planning on coming at 9? we got Guinness, pizza, herb, and some more beer
On my way
Kewl
From  creepy to my babby son alway pray and look toward a rainbow and you will see a angle
A right angle? Or an acute angle?
Square
Hey missy. Should we bring anything tonight? (food, pop, bible, lightsaber)?
Awesome! Pop and a snack would be so great. Lightsaber optional :)
Call me very in portant
Word!
How's it going?
Good. You coming over tonight?
I believe so, what's the gameplan?
Short. Quick study
Lol ok
Ross still calls private polica said i cant file charges e for her trying to sell heroin to me till she does something to me t   he
I understand thank you i love you
Thank you for your time yesterday need to talk to your elovly wife
beer:thirty tonight...
Hey dude! Sorry, I didn't hear the phone go off, but hey what about next wed?
Yeah that should work
Ok sweet man, what time do you normally get done?
9:30ish
Ok sweet, I should be done with my rehearsal by then!
K kewl
Dude how do you get copy of tex out of phone
Text messages?
Yes
Magical shrooms of joy and gladness
in chicago friend will do in morning
Wanted to see how your new life is going. job, marriage?
job is so fun but very tiring lol always learning . Still living at home saving for a house
Good to hear things are going so well. Very happy for you. You will do well as long as you remember there is always more to learn.
Thanks mom
You are welcome son. Love and miss you.
Love and miss you to
Love you too.
I'm back from training what the word on the lap top miguel
Got rid of a bunch of malware, your antivirus doesn't expire till next year so left it installed
U still had old antivirus installed which isn't good so I got rid of that
Cool thank, did u try going to my email ands login I all ways have problems with that site not opening gave to mess with security settings
Nope
Haven't had lots of time to play with it
School started
Ok
Samantha has last minute recruit meeting in indiana so we are on our way out. Were there dinner plans already?
No, grandma is not feeling well so probably something lite.
So we should fend for ourselves or no?
Gram mentioned pizza hit?
Sure, that's fine.
Whatcha up to?
Are you going to steves?
He is coming to my house. Why?
If u guys want to come over to our house tour more than welcome.
Oh ok thanks. We usually just chill in garage, low key. Aren't u and Amy going somewhere tho?
Nope. Just got home
Oh ok kewl
I will let steve know when he gets here, see if he's down (I don't see any reason why not). So long as we can chill outside on deck or in garage s'all kewl
That's cool. Let me know. I've got some wine and the porch is open.
Sweet. You down if I bring settlers of Catan?
Yep
Kewl
I'm running to meijers real quick
No prob, he probably won't get here for another 20 minutes or so, and we might just walk over
Can i swing by?
Yeah
Coo
I'm here
Koo
What u up to tnght
Dunno yet
Ok
Not coming home for dinner
Did u end up hitten up the boat?
Wanna go?
Amber and I took a nap around 4pm, just woke up lol
I haven't done anything all day
Lol, is amber going?
No need for el taco bueno, gonna go pick up a ballen free pizza
Always saxy or say i love you christ first wife second dabe or me sec6 third mom 4th life is short
(2/2) seems to be wet on the bottom though.
(1/2) Hey mom, Samantha .... My phone is dead. I wanted to let you know that we moved some of the pumpkin plants and found one about the size of a basketball. It
Hey we just arranged to buy 26 grams of crack from lisa FYI
Hey amber left her phone in car, sorry if u tried contacting us
We r at the church, not far from ur house if ur up
I have not. I'm in chicago at my cousins.
Ok kewl, just making surewer didn't miss u
Nope
Cool beans
Hey could u pick up that crack today by chance?
Hey any idea when u will pick up? We want to get rid of it today. If I don't hear from u soon amber is gonna see if anyone else wants it
Hey, I think 26 is too much I'm Looking for one for my roomy thanks thou
No prob, thanks for letting me know
My friend is selling heroin too
Were u still planning on bringing that over today or should we figure another time?
Damn it. Sorry =( I can bring it by tomorrow after work. I work until 8 or on Tuesday after class
Tuesday would be good. What time do u think on Tuesday?
530
K kewl
What's the deal for tonight?
Cool, any hanging out going on afterward?
Most likely yes
Cool, bon firing?
Dunno yet, we'll see
Ok
Hey, just an observation from last week: are u and michelle on speaking terms?
?
I am honestly still trying to figure that out
Have either of u tried contacting each other?
Easier if I call?
Hey Bob. I just want to confirm that Mon, Sept 19 at 9am is a lock for the software demo. There will be 4 of us for sure and our Sup and possibly Director
may be there. I want to send out the e-mail.
Let me check, get back to u in a few. I need to catch up on email, I know I got one from u yesterday
k
That will work
ok, thanks. see you then.
I'll shoot u an email, no need to return call, nothing urgent
Bob I know ur a busy guy but I start school this wk, wondering when u might be done hooking up my laptop
Swing by later today
Cool ill be coming back from indy so that will work great
I'm here till 5
K ill be there beige then, thnx
Be there in 5 min
Yes I have him
U at the office, I'm here
 Be there in 3 min
Comin back from lunch
Here
Yo teach! You done yet?
Just about
Another buddy is joining us
Cool, I have a few coming too
Who you bringing
My buddy Jim
I got some stuff to chat with him too
Where exactly is beer:thirty?
I know in 45th in chicago, be more specific
Be there around 9:30, leaving soon
Lol well hurry up! I'm already here
Ur early
go snort a line
Hey Bob. Traffic was agreeable so I made it early. Are you available or should I wait to come in?
I'm here, let me know when ur
I'm parked outside hehe. Which Suite is it?
pure bliss with my shrooms
To a beautiful ladie remmind me of ladie daine
You got a minute.what is the app for iphone like google sky
Skyview
Thanks
np
Pops said he'll b done today. Everything went well. And susies servers work. Only had to switch out one
Awesome. Thanks.
Any plans for later?
Nope
Wanna do something later?
Sure
I am doing absolutely nothing at all lol
Coo, i'll call ya once i'm back in town
K cool
Sup?
Nuthin
Wanna swing by? I'm bringing back a pizza?
Any chance u'd be willing to bring it over here?
Do u guys have anything going on over there? Any beer or reefer anything?
Of course beer
Some new stuff too, chiva
K, i'll be by
I guess i can eat the starburst i got 4 u yesterday  enjoy ur day of rest luv barbara
U got any plans later tonight?
No why
Was thinking of going to bdubs later, like after 9 or so
Dnt have much mney
I understand that entirely. I also don't lol. Maybe we can chill here instead, and I'll make some wings. I have some 3 brothers beer already
Yeag that will wrk what tme u wnt me over tnght
About 9pm
Ok
Hey ma...we are down early cuz of the weather
U can come at 8:30 if u want
Ok
Wings are done lol
Falling off the bone too lol
Nce
Ok. Just for the night. Are you driving home?
Yes just for the night but no we stayed put cuz its early open tomorrow
Ok. How are you?
tired and sore...but doing OK...you
U and amber stayng fr church service
We just left, we attended already lol
Ok
Hey bonfire tonight 7:30pm
Hey bonfire tonight 7:30pm
Coo, ever heard of salvia?
The stats program?
No the drug
Yeah, it is hallucinogen
crap kids use instead of ganja, messes you up
Nice!
Hey bonfire tonight 7:30pm
They are youtube vids of kids smoking it, they trip pretty hard
Send em my way, entertainment
just search for salvia
Let's invite jonah to the bonfire to further encourage his drinking problem
Lol
No I did Enuff of that last night
Hey, if he's gonna drink he might as well be amongst friends
Lol true
R u guys gonna have food?
S'mores, chips
Maybe burgers and dogs
But I am low on beer
Might be tuff to buy on sunday
Might be tuff to buy on sunday
Lol crap
Illinois run lol
Ha, might have to, want me to?
Only if ur able to
I am, i might need to bring my computer by for later, is that cool?
Sure
Hey man, might just be me u and amber tonight lol
Lol, sounds good, i'll bring some pilz
Kewl
We got a bunch of vikes too if u don't have a lot
Want to crack open a bottle and pop some of yours, it's probably better than the shit i got
Sure
Happy labor day
Breakfast of champs lol
What's the plan for tonight?
Thanks for letting me spend the night dood
No prob man
7pm, same as every week lol
We doin food?
Just s'mores and hot dogs and if ppl bring stuff
Thanks for the invite Bob. My sister was over so couldn't make it. You in the office this week? I'd like to stop by.
Yeah MWF is best to catch me
So wed or fri
Okay.
Good morning cindy. Hope u had a great holiday weekend. Could u text me the new pointers we discussed last week?
I wish I could. I did not take notes on them. I will get in touch with Susie and ask her for them. I do remember a few
Yes these are similar to what I heard. Thanks and if u get a tighter list please forward to me.
Cool
Ok. I will see what I can get.
Putting apontment in to formally speak with you
U got plans right now?
I'm gooing to b like fifteen late
Im remminding you
To do what?
Call me when you can x
No luck with firefox, am running malware bytes
K
I have a question. Call didn't go thru.
Well I guess I have a project for tomorrow.
Lol
Did it have red lights or green?
Green
Good should be a easy fix:-P
So are you and amber up for something tomorrow?
I think so, yes
Where ru thinking?
Sweet! Idk, you got any preferences? Beer:thirty maybe?
Sure
What time you thinkin for.tonight?
Dunno yet
Amber has Appt at 5
So maybe 7:30?
Cool sounds good!
Can we do 6pm?
Yeah, you got something else going on later?
No, ambers Appt is earlier than I thought
Ok sounds good
Who all is meeting up, and does 6 work for everyone or should we go later?
Maybe like 630, Tim and andrea so far, they will be there around then.
Sounds good, 6:30
Cool!
Smile christ loves you. I love you more.i love your beautiful wife to.christ loves her to. I just pray with him.love a
chicago station?
Correct!
In the banquet room
Hey tell ur mom thank u very much for the gift, I'm glad you were able to help through our conversation
We should grab a beer soon. My mon-wed is tied up, but thur and fri evenings tend to work good
Sure. I'm kid-free next week, just gotta get the rental home before I go out for beer!
Sounds good. We'll make plans next week
I'm actually in maryland next week, so thur night would work best. Probably around 6:30 or later depending on where u want to go
Sounds good. Thurs is usually an early day for me so I can get home and switch cars.
Kewl
Sup
In Michigan should be back in a few hours
Coo, my dad's wondering if u could stop by and set up his browser lol
Lol, what do u mean set up his browser?
I'm guessen
Gotcha lol
Hey. I don't have my key to ur house. I'm gonna call when I'm on my way to ur house.
What is the day of that beer fest?
Sat Sep 24th
And if u want to come camping also then fri night thru sun morning
Coo, thanks
Yeah, sounds like fun
I recieved inheritence winng from f b i wait to talk to you f b i wtagl
Huh?
Hey bob, it's Mike. Where are we meeting tonight?
I bought some chimay for tonight!
Kewl
Probably will have sitdown with u and michelle tonight too if she comes also, FYI
It's ok, I got beer!!   J/k
I will be late butI'll be there
K
Hey u free in a couple hours?
Yeah why?
I am gonna skip class
Ok, I am gonna be tied up til about 8 or 830 though, but you are welcome to hang with tim at the house, or you can do some work at the church or something, is
that cool?
Oh no prob, I can always go to class lol
Let me know when ur free. I am out of class
Ok will do
Red Alert! I am a moron and forgot I have the guitar group now on Thursday! Re-schedule!
Which house is urs?
No prob
I release what does not serve me and freely claim my good. THat is you? DAd
?
Just called the office looking for you.not sure what is going on.this might be the first droid to go though a window!
Uh oh
Sup
Our anniversary
Congrats!
Thanks!
3 yrs
And many more
Indeed
I have to run to work for a little while. I have to reboot a server.
Ok no problem
Ok
On my way home.
What time were you heading this way today?
Not sure, approximately an hour I think. Training there?
*raining
Where is timmy's Batman Wii game?
Off and on.
Timmy is tearing things up looking for it.
Ok, I'll call you when we're on the way
Empty case only.
Should be were all the other games are
Otherwise he might have left it at cindy
Then I have no idea ma... that's why I tell him to put games back in the cases
Lol
She needs to transfer contacts out of an old access db into her gmail. Dual monitors helps. Windows on the right, Mac on the left
That is why I like dual monitors.
Me too, is a new discovery for amber
I didn't dress up
Oops
no prob. Nobody here has a suit on!! Leaving now, be there in a few. 6 of us.
K
I have an engagement tomorrow at 9 unlesss it changes ill prolly be in at 12.
Please let me know if u get this message
Yes. I got it. What's up?
Ahhh. My phone died. But I'm in the office...situation changed.
Did you get  at your ecopsy at your door
Cool
Seen timmy for 15 min. THen his mom called.
Nice
I will not be in class tonight. I know professor  will not as well. Just to let you know.
I have all my papers but no way of submitting them
I need to find a way to get onto system haha
Ok, so no point in attending?
Yes tried 3 browsers lol
Send to me, I will submit them for you.
I would think not. Thought you were stopping by on Tuesday to fix the database. Did you try safari?
I should have stopped in on tue but got tied up with students
Will do later after work
Yeah so u got ne ganja?
Or bring them tomorrow and you can log in and put them up.
Her mom is not doing well at all. let's light up in a few
Is prof Susie ok? Her mom doing ok? MJ in a few?
Man what did you do. I will have student look over your ad account. When was the last time you were successful? hey only 16 min till 420!
Ok sounds good
Tonight after 8pm
Yeah sorry to hear that. see ya in a bit
Layer after work what? Send them to me?
Arg
Prof was sick yesterday. Now today her mom is in the E R.
So class is cancelled?
That sucks
I meant I'd send papers later, but tomorrow sounds better
Cancer may be in her brain. She is in a lot of pain.
Either way works for me. If I don't see them tonight, then we plan on tomorrow.  Yeah it does suck. Susie is not in a good place right now to.deal with losing her mom.
Yeah
We should pop pilz some night and go hang out with her, but maybe not since her mom is home
No, she just might not be there. She just sent email stating she would try to make it for 6:30 tonight.
Ok. Susie just emailed me. Her mom does not have cancer in the brain. She is going to try to male it to class after all.
I see. So just show up anyway?
If they keep her mom over night, that would be good for Susie.
Ok
I would assume so. Or keep trying to get into system
Yes
I sent her a message asking if she thinks they will keep her mom. waiting on a reply. I will keep you posted
K kewl
They are keeping her mom.
Sent her a message asking if she would be up to a bottle of wine, some pills and a couple of students after class. Waiting for response.
Jack she says YES!
I forgot to ask. Let me find out
Awesome, what kind of wine does she like? I got pilz dept covered (xanax & vikes)
Once I find out, I will go purchase it.
K I will bring one too, if nothing else then as a gift from us
So just meeting later or is she having class also?
What time
Dunno yet
Late
I will go to meeting,call. SEe you then.
So I assume no class?
She was going to.try and be there. I am not going to be in class.
Ate you in class?
Are u in class? Not, ate.
When r we meeting at her house?
No I am at work
Don't know
Nope
Do you know if she is on class?
When ru heading that way?
Waiting to hear from her on the wine selection as well.
We r not meeting, change of plans
Ok
Can I call u?
Yes
Thank you. I .retype. IF i should move on i will be and angle over you and family.as aunt merrlie was to me.when you have a warning in your brain cells think,
Wireless barely works
Seems to happen a lot around this time lol
I reset it but no help
Network is fine, only wireless has issues. Weird
Looks like its time for a new AP
Lol yup
sure it's not your laptop to try different laptop
I rebooted
Changed my Mac address too lol
I have my wish done more profetional and noterized 2 copys.i can drive to you latter if convient to you. THank you,i can sleep now.
K
Thank you,christ is with us. DAd
K
Left a voice mail. I will call you once I hear from her.
Sorry cindy, forgot my reefer in my car.
Ok. And you need it for what?
smoke breaks, rastafarian style
It's fine now.
I will be there soon if you need me.
Have fun without me!?
k
Plenty more in my stash no worries
sum acapulco gold
Nothing?
Not yet.
Hmm
I'm still in the hospital with mom.  Won't be home until late. I am home tomorrow morning.  We can talk about the class then.
From Susie  I'm still in the hospital with mom.  Won't be home until late. I am home tomorrow morning.  We can talk about the class then.
I work days, can't meet in the AM
Me too.
Lol yup
What's the plan for this weekend?
Come to our house by noon tomorrow
Tomo i'm at that lounge, i'll be back in town by 6 or 7
Sorry my bad
I meant Saturday at noon
Coo
Hi, what u upto. SMile
Chilling
Love your wife
Just checking in on you! How are you? How is your mom?
MRI shows no bleed or tumor but shadow at base of skull. Waiting for results of bone scan. Morphine making her loopy.
Morphine ish funny. I laughed at my mom when she was on it. Glad to here showed no bleeding or tumor. Would be nice if they could find the source off her pain. How long they keeping her?
Monday
Which hospital? What's her name. I would like to send her a little flower arrangement if you think it would be ok!
chicago hospital, room 123. Jane Q. Patient. Very kind of you.
I will send her up something tomorrow. Maybe it will lift her spirits and give her a smile. Hope it helps in some small way.
Ok. I will be around. When you are up to it.
Thank you. Maybe we can talk sat or sun abt the db class
Chest still feels funny.  Been resting all day. I'll be better tomorrow
Btw big meeting at township for database with support people on wed. 100 expected. I'm on the panel
Very nice. Hope it goes well.
My cough has made my chest hurt again. Not a good feeling. Make sure you rest and take care of yourself. We need you healthy and so does your mom. Worried about you.
Are you up and dancing with your lovly wife. I'm thinking.dinner latter with aunt mary and howie. ?
No, we r going to a beer festival today
amber wants me to text everyone to be here by noon so we can leave shortly after that
Have diet pepsi on me. WEre is it at.
U need tickets an they r sold out lol
I will come as a priest and save them all
Whats up man can you do anythng tnght
At beer festival
Where at
chicago was sold out weeks ago
Ok
Whatcha up to?
Dinner plans sorry
Ok
Just got google tv
Bob call when you can about party
Cool
cindy a professor asked if i could watch his class for awhile he's running late. Sam and Bob are in the office
Thank yotu or you both. I have walk thre w hell. I need advice. I have powerful mind threw christ.i will work a mircle with your help.i am making lifbe heavin,
Yes and I have the phone
I sent the results to bill in June
Why do u ask?
No, that's what I thought I was waiting for.
Ok I'm sitting with them getting all the information for the phone records now.
Yeah they never got back to me on it (and vice versa) lol
Lol no worrys
R u in class?
Which room r u in?
Bldg G
Just seen your email. Just had to laugh, James use equipment:-D
Lol, u caught that ;)
What's your eta?
6 minutes
Did the garbage can get most of it?
Yes
Good
They are here now
Ok kewl
Like my laptop recovery?
It literally dumped like a waterfall the first time
Lots of rice
Hey whats up can u do anythng tnght
Nope got friend over
Ok
U guys up to anything tonight?
Friend just left
Prob going to bed, sleep deficit lol
Texting because I don't want to wake u up if ur still in bed. We still on for today? If so, what time?
Im up we plan on leaving here at 1:30, should be sunny and 57 up there
Awesome
 Ready for beer, looks like 6 guys for sure, maybe 8
Kewl
Come over any time
K locking up
Okay
Gateway is down
Great. I am in wisconsin
This line sucks lol
Keep your heart with all vigilance, for from it flow the springs of life. -Proverbs 4:23         dad  iewu
Hey Bob, sitting next to my dad, he's asking if u could stop by one of these days to take a look at comp one of thse days
Yeah
We are on for th at 630 with Herbert. Can you still make it?
Yup
See u there
Where should we meet?
Thanks! Cafeteria
 south end
Kewl
Hey I am going to be having my bday party saturday the 8th in the evening time. Alcohol, acid food, and friends can't be much better right!!! You can also bri
ng your significant other if would like.
Alright are u going to be here tomorrow?
Yes
Ok I'll talk to u then thanks for the help
K
Thanks for the birthday card! I hope the three of us can get together and have a good time soon
Indeed
7 to 8 meeting close.need to talk about desion on money and letter to doctor. THank you.meeting is close
No problem.
amber should be there on time.
Thanks. When u called, I wasn't sure what was going on. I thought it was like 3 in the morn. When I hung up the phone, I realized it was only 1030. Lol
Lol nice
How ate you today? I will see you at the funeral home after work tonight. Stay strong and take care of yourself.
Thank you.how do i change divine cod. HAve to go back to llobet.call latter
Huh?
Yes
You want his new book?
Sure
I will be there almost exactly at 6:30, possibly a few minutes late depending on traffic.
No prob
Traffic was awesome coming into cafeteria now
Be there in five
U guys coming to grand lux? Trying yo figure out how many seats...
Nm they just told me ur coming it is someone else they aren't sure about. See u soon
Roses are re2d is made by two. BAbys are made of love and push ups of enjoyment too. SMile god loves both of you, me too.
Roses are re2d is made by two. BAbys are made of love and push ups of enjoyment too. SMile god loves both of you, me too.
Are you done?
Hi ma wanted to cut the grass for you but I need some gas I'm out just thought id let you know
Can I plug it in now?
Yes just had to wait a half an hour.
K kewl
Sorry I was cutting grass
Stocked with pepsi lol. I'll get something diet in there too soon
No prov
Just water I have diet in my fridge
I'll split a case with you.
K
Ok. I will have to go het some.
Ok thank you
Sitting in bar
U comin to chic Fil a?
r u here?
Yeah we already ordered and got food lol
Come in
What are ya up to tonight?
Dunno yet
May be a three brothers night
Ic
Hey ru working tonight? Considering dinner options...
Yes sir
Ok red robin in chicago or wheaton?
chicago
K ru waiter tonight / should we ask for u? Or ru in kitchen
I'm in the kitchen
Ok, well then we'll tell our server to let u know we're here so we can say hi
Lol it depends on how busy we are
But I would like to meet up with you sometime in the next few days just to talk and get some guidance
Sure thing
How is ur Sunday evening or afternoon?
Sunday afternoon would be good
Ok
What time?
4pm? We can meet at a coffee shop or at my house
Starbucks? How about like 4:30
Sounds good
Awesome thanks man
We are in joe's section, towards the back
What'd you order
Just got it. Fish and chips and a cheeseburger with pepperjack
Lol I made the fish andchips
Kewl lol. They're good
Three brothers?
What time?
We're crazy busy can't come out but I'm right by the door behind the line if you see me on your way out lol
K lol
Around 815 or so
Ok
Is she comin?
No
beer:thirty?
Lol I'm at three brothers and we are going to beer:thirty after this! Meet us up lol
Where is it?
chicago on michigan ave
But we will be at brothers for a few more minutes
Want me to call when we r finishing up here?
Text me
K
Is it on main st?
k I will bring some oxy bars
Where on that street?
U wanna meet us at brothers?
Aight
We might be here for a few b4 we go to beer:thirty
Ppl keep shown up
I will call u if we relocate, so keep ur phone handy lol
Aight
Thank you for asking me last night. SOrry i was sick.i have colar back in skin some what.
Sweet
Thx for sharing
Is 5 pm ok?
Yeah that will work fine
Thanks man
No prob
Sure
I'll be there in five minutes
Sweet
Hey cindy where can I find the sample use case Susiewent over in class 3 weeks ago?
In the team folder?
Ok I will check later. Thanks
Just recieved child support bill.for st.
For who?
You guys wanna have dinner at chic fil a?
We r making dinner for everyone tonier
Lol ok
Did one of you say you would clean the mess in the kitchen?
Anyone need some smack?
Have set of keys. STop by.
K not tonight tho
I had dream you were working on twins, you have to due it twice in arrow.get bus. I have to come in to cedar pt. TOmarrow morning.have keys with me.
Let me know and I could take lunch break with you
Are you bus. DUe twice not your tongue
Think u could take a look at my comp tonight so that i could play the lessons on it?
Dunno about tonight, but text me later
K
Look on to patio and smile
K
Latter when have time call me.are you teaching? NEed a student? WOw he can see and pee.
Get a chance call me
K
Mark was wondering if he  were able to come to the shin dig on Sat?
Yeah
Ok, I will let him know. You got class tonight?
No working late tho
Hey cindy, I was wondering if you are still on campus?
Yes, i am up on bldg G
Ok.
K c u in a minute
Feeling better. HOw are you doing?k.i.s.s.
Doing well
Can you please send me your comcast email address so i can set up your logmein software?
email@person.net
Thank you. Things are moving along nicely. I am waiting on tech support to take care of the printer for me. Then we will be ready to test remote login and printing.
Great.  My cold is worse.  At home, but I can test if needed.
Rest for now, it will be a while.
I have a new assistant
?
Hey call Amanda asap, before 4pm
It has to do with paying you or something of equal importance
Lisa has a cold so not going out tonight
Sounds like she has a cold so no beer tonight :(
It happens.  That's the 51% curve
Lol yup
Hey bob its me mike the party is tnght at six right
Yep
U comin tonight? Bring a date... :P
Don't forget mary jane party tonite at 6
Got a place in the city, but i'll try to be back n town by then
Yeah? Kewl. Where at?
123 main st
Awesome, nice area
456 fictitious st, chicago, il Couch and chair, $50.00
You want me to bring anything tonight?
Could you maybe bring a 2 liter of diet pop?
Coke or pepsi is fine
Or dr pepper, so long as it is diet
Ok i lost the invitation
No prob
See u tnght
Kewl
Lol why diet?
Not everyone drinks regular
Lol but its Halloween, that means its ok! ;)
That's cool, I'll pick some up!
I have the child Tiger so I"m out! Thanks for the invite.
Bill and/or Jim are welcome to come too
Just so u know...
Jim has a friend over so they're on XBox and I'm hoping they go out and enjoy the weather. Maybe steal some street signs or something; break into the sch
ool; you know...
Lol nice
Tell amber I said Hi!
Will do
BTW, Lynn had too much antifreeze the other night, almost died. She wasn't used to that black tar
 We're all pretty concerned. I'll keep you posted.
Woah. Gotta lay off the black tar with n00bs
Do want me to brng sme beer and coke
Sure
Ok we havng a fire tnght
Yeah. I told Susie that's a real bad sign. Her & Mike have known her a long time and she has a lot of family so hopefully they can help. I have to check wi
th Susie and see how she's doing. She still played with us Thursday. I guess this has happened before.
Ic. Hope he gets better
Is it ok if we cme over nw
Sure
Ok
Wish i could've attended the festivities but have WAY to much work to get caught up on :( what u guys doing next weekend?
Weekend is Pretty packed. I need to maybe come out there on a week day
U guys are always welcome up here, very nice area. I'll probably be home on the weekends, next weekend fo sho
K kewl
How far are you from the university?
Have no clue, haven't even heard of that university, i'm right next door to apple store though
Oh wow ur downtown
It is way north
Yep
I am not going to make it tonight. So sorry! Seriously, like just knowing I am missing out :) talk to you soon.
No prob. Hope ur evening is going well.
I will hit u up when I am in the area for work. I am up during the day tho usually
K, by the way a couple recruiters came to our school, it was pretty badass hearing them speak
Sweet!
Thank you very nice party. CHrist loves all of us.
Hey what was the video that we watched wth the rave dance and the ipods
Sorry for not txting back last night€ was rollin on XTC
MJ tonight
Mp3 experiment
Where u at?
Ok thanks
In some lasts house talking about contractors remoldeling her house.
We r driving around picking up full bags of dope
I need pilz bro
God created weed, man created beer. In God we trust
We are all pretty full
Yeah we hit the mother load of smack
u got some percs for me, maybe a whole bar
I need some shrooms
Wher u at?
What street?
We're at the end of the next street up from where we started
We r here
Did u get lost?
Need to micro my dinner. Back soon?
I am here at McDonalds in Wheaton with Jane Doe
Sorry, just got your text. My phone locked up and i had to do a hard reboot.
See if you can remote into nas and see the shares? Let me know
Do I have anyone available to punch?
Yes, i will very soon. Working on the server.
In
Lemme un
Yes.
When I print I have a "magicISO" drive? Can I unmount it?
it works
6
Please let me know when you would like dinner to be ready, no rush.
Hey cindy, this is Jill I going to be 5 mins late got caught by a train
Ok
Amanda and Michael will be to the house by 3:30 pm today. Michael has to wait for the school bus to get timmy and it arrives about 3:05pm.
Address is 123 main st, mycity, IL
Ok thank you
Nancy, i will not be in class tonight. I am sick.
Running late
Ok. Me too.
Your dog pucked on my couch.
ss you!  lucy
Hi~we are in california for a few days, home by Saturday night.  I catch the 12:46 in Chicago.  Let me know if you can take that one.  Sure do mi
I will be on it just so i can see you. Ky conference is right by your building. Maybe lunch?
Yes lunch would be great!
Sent an email today requesting your login id for dropbox. Did you see it? Is login id still username123 with the password password123
Hello cindy, running late I've been stopped by a train
Ok.
I have two tix for the train.  We were going to take the south shore for Jeffs b~day and we ended up driving instead~ do you want them?  lucy
Sure.
I will have them for you when I see you on Tuesday.  Looking forward to seeing you!
How much do i owe you. Not sure what tickets cost these days.
Ten bucks, I think
Ok. Don't leave without me. What time again ?
The train leaves at 6:46~if you don't make that one I will wait for you.  Do you remember where we stood on the platform?
I think so. Towards the back of the train.
Yes at the second to last car
Yes. I will see you there. 6:46 is really early.
You used to catch that one~lol!  You are spoiled now!
Yes i am. Very. I am excited to see you. Conference is at 123 michigan ave. Know where that is?
So, we can do lunch for sure.
That is my building.  The tall building.
Yes
Yeah!  How was your trip?
So who is pregnant?
I was just getting ready to call u.its Jake.
Congrats. I am so happy for you and him.
We had a nice time.  It was nice to get away and spend some time together.  We had nicer weather too~one of our hotels had an outdoor jacuzzi.
How ya doing this morning?
Weather is not cooperating. Catching the train now. Thanks for a wonderful ride in, coffee break and lunch. Love you.  cindy
No problem;  glad you had the idea so we could see each other!  Love you too.
Thanks for joining us for lunch. Sure was nice to see you and hear about your trip to Mexico  Love you.  cindy
I was nice.  We need to do that more often.  I will try to post pictures of Mexico on my facebook page. love ur hispanic sister Monica
Samantha said to text you or her when i could, what's up?
I was going to text you today and find out what the plan for saturday was
I have free tickets to take the kids to school's learning center to see a laser light show. It starts at 6:45 pm. I want to be there no later than 6:15 so we can ensure we have seats together as the room is not that big. If you want to drop them off early, i am ok with that. Just let me know what time. You can have a night to do whatever you want. I just need clothes for them on Sunday so i can also get their pictures done.
Sounds like a fun time!  when did you want me to drop them off?
By four maybe. That way i can feed them first.
Ok, might be a little early if that's ok
Sure. Sounds good. I rhink the kids will like this show. Only 45 minutes long so we won't be out late.
Cool, I think they will be impressed
Hope so.
That's me
Nice. Love the bike. Little man looks cool.
Thought ud like it
LOL! Love it. You look so cool with the dew rag on.
Thanks for sharing it. That was nice of you.
My dad use to have a bike and i have pics of my kids on his bike.
Did you end up sticking it out with the class?
Yes. Like a dummy.
Get out of bed. I am sick of hearing it from gram.
Get out of bed. I am sick of hearing it from gram.
You will be fine Meghanwould know what she was doing and I'm sure it will be for the best
If nothing else, she said she could give me an incomplete because of me being so sick this semester. I have another way out if I need it.
Ya that will save you a little money since you won't have to pay again
No worried about the cost, it is  only a one credit course. I just don't like the no pass option attached to it.
I see
Have you placed that catalog order?
No, i was going to speak with you first.
Ok, i will place it on monday.
I still want them
Do you still want me to place your order?
okay
Ok.
let me know what I owe you
Hello this is Susie here is my permanent number to get in contact with me
Thank you.
That job is not in posting yet on website.
No worries school sent me an email to apply for this position and I just did. Thanks.
I'm trying to start tutoring my 15 yr old nephew in the art of dealing. Mind if I give him a field trip out to ur work sometime?
Hay ma do you need me to come homeÄandrew is dropping me off at Sara work and Sara will be taking me home...
No, i don't mind. He just better not be no undercover cop
Amazon Appstore: Get the Amazon Appstore: https://www.amazon.com/app-sms. Reply HELP for help.Msg&data rates may apply
Ave, do you have the lab key with you?
Yes just put it back
Ok thanls.
Are you on campus or off campus? You cannot access it by ip number off campus unless you go through the database.
Ok. I'm at home and will try it through the database. Thanks
I tried connecting on both my Mac and Win 7 computers. They both timed out and wouldn't connect.    Please try it yourself to see if it is available. Thanks
I can get in .
Ok I didn't put in https.  However it not gives me access denied. I'm using my normal username and password.
Good to hear.
Never mind I'm now in. Thanks
Change the domain drop down box to staff from employee
Is an 8.4MB file too large?  It shows sending request to gateway.server.com  But it isn't doing anything.
Ok
I do not know of any file restriction sizes. It may be a slow connection.
It finally did upload.  Thanks
work is turning into a drama dept. I'm about a week away from finding a new job.
Now what?
Don't wanna name names but there's a ripple that's making everyone unhappy...
I love this job but the environment has gotten bad recently
Stop confiding in Jack.
?
Lets talk tomorrow.
Now I hear he's telling Jack about my recommendation to cut his hours til he quits
Because ' he doesn't wanna see him get fired'. About a week ago he was fighting to get him firef
Bob, I am so sorry. I will address it with Mike tomorrow.
I'm officially on the lookout for a new job if he continues working here.
I totally understand. I will see what I cam do as well.
Can I just do something that I can can do from home tomorrow?
My bad
who said I was coming by
its gonna take more than some pot to get me to come over
mr. smith took my vikes in study hall!
Ur so special 2 me ill a thinkin of u
Hey man you got that dro?
Hey Mitchell you got some weed?
haha I figured I'd convince you
yeah? What about a rock?
that aint even right
(RE:)Hey sexy sorry i  just got ur tx im cleanin up about 2 leave work hows ur day goin
No man, I quit. No more herb for me.
I got some of that fine dro or the regular skunk
sure u just moochin weed
I'm listening
u tell him u got a prescription?
(RE:)Pretty good went by slow tho cuz ive been thinkin bout u boo i cant wait 2  c u 4real
I understand. When you coming up to my new crib to visit?
damn dude the ganja fairy must've visited you or sumthin
no way man I got my own herb
yeah come up I got some grams of crack to split wit u
yah but he said he knew I was selling bars
(RE:)I misS u
I didn't know u had a new crib, dawg
yeah she did, plenty of dope to smoke
bs
hey come see my new crib and bring some skunk
that's total bullshit
(RE:)Im still n gas city im waitn on my bro 4 sumthin rdal quick i do miss u sexy
hat time should I go there to stand in line
Hey cindy its michelle I need ur shopping advice u guys are queens of holiday shopping I wanted to get something from meijers and the sale starts at 6am w
I would be there at least by 4:00 am at the latest. They are open all night so their lines start forming early in the store. Hard to really say when you should be there. How bad do you want the item?
I mean I guess if I can get it great if not no big deal I wasnt sure if they let u in the store if its for the 6am sale
Yes, lines form inside then stores. They have signs up that say, line forms here. Last year they did not say which line was for what item. So you should ask before standing in a line.
Din't think so.
Ok thanks it is an eletriic item so ill be sure to be in the right line are you guys going out
Ok thank you!!
Happy Thanksgiving to u and ur family.
Thank you. I wish you and your family a Happy Thanksgiving too.
Happy Thanksgiving
Back at you.
Saturday night at bar with bob and others.
I just hung our bff ornament on my tree!  Love you,  lucy
Love you too. Glad it has a special place on your tree.
Be there in a bit, both of our names are on this paper....
How about going to bar to do code? Susiewants your input.
Tonight?
Cool. We are outside waiting for a table still.
Be there in 15-20 min
Nice lol
We have a table right inside the door.
K almost there
Yeah! Fo like 2 wks now
hey markie  bring some reefer when you come by later
no really, plus mike is bringing some dro
k
ya it is
(RE:)Man thats really good news tell him 2 keep it up thats awesome i was wnrried he was gon head down a bad boy path
(RE:)Hell ya thats wats  tp momma n joel is good n 2 smart not havin a dad grown up is very hard n leaves scars
(RE:)Thats wats up n so do i mayb hf itr cool ill come thru 2nite ctz we gotta talk ne ways
(RE:)Ok 4sho i will u got any herb?
(RE:)That would b tite if md n him wemt 4 pics
(RE:)Im dead serious no bs homes
(RE:)4 wat its worth sorry, sorry 4 brkn tha pact  n 4real thanx 4 bein grown wit all this
(RE:)U already know girl
(RE:)N thats y ill alwayz love u cuz u a bad bitch on my life xx
(RE:)Lmao u crazy ass but 4real i wouldnt want it no other way
(RE:)Hey wat thme do u git off b
(RE:)Cool i just got off let me c wats good give me a min nimma holla
(RE:)Can i slide thru
(RE:)Cool here come im leavhn IPW now babe
our athoriety if you have time next week and go help me with anything specific I did so I can work on it I'd really appreciate it.
cindy I tried to talk to you today but earlier you were with jim and later I missed you. You told me some strong things the other day about lying and y
Thank you both for leaving the basement lights on. And it reeks in here like skunk
Gateway lost its config
Ill try n see if neone is in operations who can let me remote in
Crap my desktop is down for remote access.
What they gave me was access to was directories... I'm sorry can't fix it
If not, let me know. I will have to drive in and fix it.
Ur gonna have to drive out there...we need a dedicated logmein server..
How do doe's students hit his server
Not sure. I have a vpn account, but cannot remember the url. Let me see if there is a link off the web page.
K. Sorrry
Nope, no go. I say we let it go and hit it first thing in the morning.
What is the ip number for the web server, i got in.
How'd u vpn
.4 .6 or. 10 I think they all work. And yes on 192
Lemme know if u get it up... ill respond to emails
Trying to see if my efforts paid off. Yes. I am in the database.
You need to send request to hostmaster asking for VPN access.
Are you coming to training?
Yes driving now
Ok. See you soon.
Can I skip work tomorrow?
I'm not feeling great
Sure.
Hey cindy, I'm really sorry but I'm gonna he in around 8:45 or so because I over slept.
That is ok. Jack called off and Al is out as well. Everything is pretty quiet.
Can i speak with you sometime today regarding my directed project
Can you come to cafeteria.
Yes. When
Now?
On my way.
I'm on the first floor
Ok
Thank you Jill, you rock. Max signed off on my paper during a break.
Excellent!  You rock!!!!
We just finished up. Are you free?
Yes, be right there. I have to pick up surge protectors from that room.
Okay. I'll be up here.
Hi cindy, I went to return the key and the doors were locked upstairs. Do you want me to bring it in tomorrow before Ave gets here, or can I give it to M
ike to bring in?      Susie
Give to james.
Will u be back to ur office soon?
On my way.
Ill b in at 10
When r u getting to the restaurant?
I want to get there about 6 to get a table hopefully
Ok
Where are you.
You guys still going to bar tonight correct?
We are here. Stop on by. We are at the bar.
person@email.com
Be there soon.
Hey its a total of 25 pages for the total paper or is it 15?
10 for the paper, 15 annotated bibs.
Can u talk?
Yes
No thank you.
Lol ok
Do I have permission to take servers offline?
Yes.
i woke up today and my room is flooded! im going to be late i need to help move some stuff with my 1 hand. i will be there as soon as possible. no later than 9
Rachel is going to u of c.
Luv u 2 seyy w all my soul we just got back n now were puttn up tha tree igot them each an xtra gift2 putunderit4 now we miss our mom loveu
Naw u flawless n a perfect mother i love our family 2 we r just missin 1 lil but im tha lucky 1 cuz im so blessed
Rachel is working for university of Chicago according to John Doe.
Omg!  Let's hope she's at a satellite campus, not the main one in chicago.
Do ypu know a dr. doe or something like that from university of chicago? I think that is who michael said told him a few months ago that rachel applied there and was a serious candidate for tenure professorship.
I hope you and you family have a very Merry Christmas and Christmas eve!
Thank you Mike. I wish you, susie and your families a very merry christmas and a happy new year.
Thank you, Susie says thanks too.
Love and best wishes to both of you.
Betsy said that's so sweet and thanks
Merry Christmas.
Merry christmas.
Want to wish you and your family a very Merry Christmas filled all of Gods glorius blessing..
May God bless you and your family on this day especially and every day to come.
Where r u at now
The cook county jail. I am lost?
Can I get into the  labs at 4?
James, i need to turn in a timesheet for you. What hours did you work and can i sign your timesheet for you?
I worked eight hours each day Monday to Wednesday last week. You can sign it and thank you very much for saving me the trip out there.
Not a problem.
What's up
On our way to the smoke shop.
Wishing you a happy new year!  Looking forward to scrapping with you next year!  Happy b~day to your mom!  Love you!  lucy
Sara is in aurora hospital.
It's snowing
I got it
Timmy left his chips and cocoa.
Timmy says thanks. We are out front.
Ok just waiting in a chair for Sara
Chair there yet.
If not, go get one by the elevator.
I stole one lol
Make up some excuse to get them moving.
Sending up prayers~keep me posted.  lucy
He is scheduled to go any time know. Waiting for his driver to show up.
Sending a hug for Amanda.  Hang in there!
cindy may I please get off work at 1? i have to go to check n go to pay a loan in kirstens name and she must sign it before she goes to work
Yes, you may. Reflect it on your time sheet.
Thank You Very Much
How are things?
No news yet.
ok keep me posted please
Sending a hug for Amanda.  Hang in there!
Will.do.
Thanks.
How are you guys doing?  I'm sure he is in surgery by now.  Any word?
He finally went in for surgery at 2 pm. Nurse comes out on the hour for updates. We know he is
Currently in the middle of the procedure. Three hours to complete.
AT&T Free Msg: AT&T recommends you enable a voicemail password for added security. Visit att.com/vm to see how you can set your password today.
Biopsy = benign. Out of surgery
Fantastic!!!
My bro-in-law is out of surgey. Biopsy came back as benign.
Did they still remove the lung?
They were able to save most of it.
Sounds like you need another consult.  Why remove any of it with no cancer?
There were so many lesions and pockets that was contributing to his copd that it was difficult to get to the sections that needed to be biopsied. The doctor said he removed only what he had to. They were only going for the upper 1/3 of the right lung.
Should consider docs in Chicago.  I find that sw suburbs docs suck.  Research lung docs.
I will tell Amanda to look into this. Thanks for the advice. I am sure she will look into it.
Just trying to share my experience. My heart goes out to you.
No, thank you for your insight. I value your opinions as always. Thank you for caring.
Great news!  Hope everyone will be ok.
How is everything with the family today?  lucy
Getting better all the time. Thanks for asking. Tom is. going to be moved to a different room and out of cvu. Best news news benign.
hey i accidently took the 410 key. i work in the morning is that ok?
Yes.
ok thank you. see you in the morning.
cindy I thought the guys put back both keys but they put one back left the other in the lab. So the lab key is locked in the lab. Just making sure you you know.
Ok.
Hey sweetie since u wanna talk shit bout me and bobby ur totally fucked should of realized my ipad recorded everythung.f
rom in my bathroom wasnt gonna b a salty bitch plus all these text sucks to b ur bitch ass wasnt gonna bc then everyone
 gonna know my hand was all over loook in ur shit.but u wannt to from smith to me fucking jack like we both know thats a
joke and ur gonna talk shit bout me and bobby being heroin junkies lmao i got scripts and get dropped weekly wonder ur piss clean
Hey sweetie since u wanna talk shit bout me and bobby ur totally fucked should of realized my ipad recorded everythung.w
hen it was next to the toiley .in my bathroom wasnt gonna b a salty bitch plus all these text sucks to b ur bitch ass w
asnt gonna bc then everyone gonna know my hand was all over loook in ur shit.but u wannt to lie bout€smith to me fucking.
.jack like we both know thats a joke and ur gonna talk shit bout me and bobby being heroin junkies lmao i got scripts and get
dropped weekly wonder ur piss clean u fucking tell everyone ur a fucking liar or.its on u fucking bitch dont believe me ask ever
yone who was over last night i showed everything to
Oh yeahh and my dad put u and tim on the bared list at Wendy's and warehouse dont u have 4 kids and work why u always there
Lmfao  riiiight okay
Alright well im callin cps on.u
bobbys.the one who told.me.bye.
I dont talk to bobby but ok. Idc wht u say. N if cps shows up here ill jus call em on u as well. So cool
Robbing rway lmao.getting the scrap out to clean it tjhat.my mom.
Baby callpls ive been cleanbye will do :)
Anythubg.u got i got ten times worse joke sorry got my shit together tha y u cant pay bills and hace to ask everyone to borro
w moneyhavnt thought of u.dince everuone here says u.and wuill run ur mouths  bye hunnie
Lmfao thanks needed that laugh
Ur done go share stds with tim and Jessica so ur step dad can rap u again keep it all in the family dont wory wont bother ur
ass.agai.just want ur ass.in check u dumb crack whore cunt
Just keep my name out ur my and my fruiends bye
Hey I stopped here in Peoria and I'm only 2 hrs away. I can be up there around 10 or so. Will that be ok with u
Do you have lab key 410?
I miss u too luv  I hope today goes by fast
John gave me some money woo hoo!
Aww i love u soo much n yes i am goin str8 home babygurl nick drove n his wifey got him on lock so ill b thinkn off u till i can hold u
I h8 bein without u 2 sexy but ya ill tell nick n i cant wait till then boo i need u n love u so much
So r does that mean were going to have sex tonight?
Yes YES i need it n i promise i wont fall asleep I haven't popped any vikes tranqs or valium so that helps boo
Yeah well see luv
Lol IM 4 REAL baby
Ok then cant wait  I love u babe :-)
I love u 2 baby i cant wait either
Its almost over :-) hope ur day is going good ily xoxo
Im on my way home beautiful cant wait 2 c u
I miss u so mmuch
You too babe.
Geeze I already miss u. I love u
Iver heard that b4 lol. Seriously its not a big deal. I love you. Im not even trippin.
I love u 2 gorgeous miss n kiss u
Hope ur having a good day so far im thinkn bout u
How is ur day?
Busy busy baby but at least time is goin by fast i cant wait 2 c u
Well thats good. Mines going by slow  Im so sleepy (tranqs don't help). I miss u so much.
(1/2) That sux ya i thought id b able 2 take lunch now cuz im hungry but i still got like 2.5 hrs left of work on this truck GOTTA make this $ tho baby!i miss
(2/2) u more stay sexy my love and lay off those tranqs!
(1/2) O ya good luck at tha doc n my mouth is hurtin like  a bia ive been poppin pain meds aways out of our 1st aid kit at work o my jeebus but im checkn on my
(2/2) nsurance 2day cuz imma have 2 go 2 tha dent soon my love
Yeah like asap like yesterday. Ill get u ora gel when I go out. Itll help. Uughh I jus want to sleep!
Hey girlie i miss u so much only a lil longer than im off.
u poppin tranqs again? Vikes? Percs? Xanax? I told you to be careful with them pilz, but I might pop a few myself tonight
I miss u too  Cant wait to see u. we'll pop a few pilz together, I got some vikes and xanax. I love you! Xoxo
Im bout 2 get off tha tollroad babygurl c u n a min
Ill b back in a lil bit. Ily
Well b home by 1030 baby
Love u
They just gave me another court date babe
Love u girlie
Im on my way home boo
Home safely.
Good~roger just got home too
Ok. Bob is mia as well.
I'm late on.my way
The available guys said they couldn't recreate the problem. It was 129 correct?
Hi cindy its Susie, the key is not in the lockbox
I found it
Who had it? Ryan?
Tom had it when I checked at 6:20 then he returned it to the box when I checked again at 6:30
Your welcome
Ok. Thanks.
I will bring them home
Call me when you can.
Hi cindy, running late had to meet for a group project this is Jill by the way.
Hello hey found out tonight its a girl.
Congrats. When is the due date?
Thank you.June 20th.
Do they have some names picked out?
Sorry just seen your text went to Zumba.I really dont know what there going to name her.I think there still deciding.
Call me when you can.
This is Jill by the way
Hi cindy I'm running late
I'll be about 30 minutes late.  Could you open the door and tell people to wait?0
ETA?
Are you coming tonight?
Hi cindy, I'm gonna be in a little late this morning. I woke up with whatever sickness my girlfriend has.
Ok. I am late as well. My mom is having some health issues as well.
No news on helga other than stage 4 stomach cancer.
Stomach,did not know that part.
Yes, had her gallbladder removed late monday the old fashion way, found stomach cancer all over.
At work?
Running late had to meet with my group for class
Ok.
Thanks
We are expecting some heavy snow - possible 6+ inches in cook and will starting today and ending early saturday.
Well he has to deliver Monday up in Illinois.
*at
We are almost ay your house
Yes.
Someone has big boy undies on
Yea!  Tom should be up there around 1
Lol
Omg were did he put it all lpl
R u on campus.  I'm here
Call me.  I have question about burning the SQL software
Need a student help at 11:15, the lounge,
Today is Billy's bday
Thank you.
Is it possible to know this weekend? We're closing Friday
Chicken soup on the stove right now. Should be ready in a few hours. Definitely for dinner.
Btw it has two more leafs and a pad
I am trying to find out. My daughter is working.
Soup anyone?
Ok
Were you. And or mom coming the pizzas are due anytime?
Have you heard anything?
The young lady never replied to Sara yesterday. She said she would call her today. I hope to hear from her soon.
Would you be willing to sell just the hutch? I know someone looking for one but ill need the price & measurements. Let me know. Thx
I can ask her. Do you have a price in mind?
I have someone interested in the hutch. Willing to separate?
Ok but got $100
Ok but for $100
Lisasaid yes, $100.00 for the hutch.
Thx...ill pass it along n see what she says.
Ok. Thanks.
Having a friend of mine asking her friend. I will let you know when i hear from her.
Tom is heading to Chicago
Cool i bet he does not have the netbook. When does he get in?
Nope, he went to southern Indiana then to Michiagan now delivering tomorrow morning in Chicago.  I'm going to send it with stuff for the kids.
If you don't have school tonight he might want to spend time with you all.
I have school for a little while, but i think i will skip it since i really have not done any work on my directed project refently.
I told Sara to call him.
Got the code working. Time to blaze
Mind sending me some of that? Lol
Code or bud? haha
the wacky terbacky of course!
see ya in a few ;)
Jill OD deadÄ heroin - can't fuck wit dat shit
How is mom doing today? Tom and you doing as well as can be expected under the circumstances?
t but I am good. Thanks for checking on us. Got time this weekend for a visit?  Maybe a straight drink or two?
Mom having bad day. Had to kick out all visitors. Jack is having problems with sugar due to stress. I am fine. Just not eating and know o should. Also need res
I will make time. Mexican dinner maybe?
Sorry to hear about mom. What put her back in the hospital and at chicago to boot?
rite
Dinner would b great. Have to get back to u on night and time. Saturday probably best for me, what about u? Will explain hospital stuff at dinner. Too long to w
Sat nite will work for me. Taking the kids to go see the lorax that afternoon. I will be ready for adult drinks by evening. Lol.
Lol great.
funeral coming soon
fuck that sux. good ones die young
yeah
ble to get together tomorrow.
Looks like I cannot go tonight. They r running more tests on mom today. I will write you when I know we can get together. What nights do u have classes? May b a
Just let me know what works for you. I have classes on tuesday and wednesday. Then on spring break.
How is your mom doing this morning? I am praying for her.
want to c u today, but it is still up in the air as to whether I will b able. Will keep u informed. Thanks for prayers.
us. Docs said yesterdAY that she May come home today, but nurse seems to think that isn't likely. Too much they still need to do before releasing her.  I still
She is sitting up, but has been asleep since we got here.  She is very confused, doesnt make sense much when talking. Doc is supposed to b on his way to talk to
I can come to the hospital. I just don't want to interfere with moms comfort and such.
s home to c her.  Tom is waiting too.  Maybe u and Tom could come one day this week when she is home.
I appreciate it, but visitors seem to make her agitated. I had to b rude and kick everyone out Thursday,Friday and yesterday.  May b better to wait til she come
That will be fine. That is why i have not come up there. I know your mom does not care for all that attention when she is not feeling well. She needs her rest, not frustration and agitated by visitors.
How long are you staying?
Agreed.  I plan on being here until next weekend.  I will drive home on Saturday, I think.
Just give mom my love and tell her i hope she feels better soon. Love her so much and you too.
Michelle Conway is coming tomorrow night to give me a break and help. So I will have more time after she gets here.
I will tell mom u send love and prayers. I love u too so much.
burn one in her memory
Watching The VOICE
I'm so jealous
Yes. Finished product picture coming soon. No lunch for me tomorrow.
Dogs would love those
Did mom get her cookies
God don't talk about food. All u can eat ribs were $16.99.
Lol
Left them on the table. Bill will bring his.
Really?  Great deal I'm sure he loved that!
Status on mom? How is she doing today.
She is at home, but not doing well. Hey, d u get time for lunch. Enough we could do lunch together if mom can get someone to stay with her one day
Yes, definitely.
their pizzas.
Thanks for driving out and picking up the stuff Luke had with him.  Also for taking him out to eat.  He loves that place.  Hope timmy and the kids love
Cannot b tomorrow, maybe Wednesday or Friday.  Friday would probably b best cause mom should b better by then
Our pleasure. We enjoyed spending time with him too.
You tell me when. If it is last minute and burger king. I don't care. Just want to see you.
Thanks!  Hope timmy feels better.
That's good!
He is feeling better already.
I will what tome do u tAke ur lunch?
Anytime i want. No set time.
Did i get the thumb drives from you last night?
I have to c moms lawyer at 1100 am tomorrow. Want to plan for lunch afterwards. Probably 1230 or 1300?
Sure. If it goes a little longer, no worries.
Messed up my dAys. I c lawyer ok Thursday so let's plan Thursday instead, ok?
Thursday it is. Looking forward to seeing you.
Thanks again for trying to fix my netbook.  Hope timmy was happy with the pizzas.
U too. I may have to stay until Monday now so maybe we can spend more time together instead of only lunch.  But lunch on Thursday for sure!
Definitely. Count me in.
stairs taking a shower.
FYI just talked to mom, Sara and Michael let that dog out back, left the door open and then went out the front door and left that unlocked too.  Mom was up
Ok. I will take care of it when i can.
I took care of it. In the future, please refrain from.sending me text.message like this during work, save them for after work please.
Ok I'm sorry
Sending positive thoughts your way today!  Let me know when is a good night to get together~ love you!  lucy
Not a problem. I just cannot always handle things as quickly as others may want them handled or i am busy with stuff that cannot be interrupted. No harm. I know mom gets upset with Michael and thinks i protect him. I just pick my Smith. Sometimes it is perception. I have to make those calls as they arise. I am not mad at you. Still love you. Stop tearing up. Been really busy thats all.
Boy do i need them. And real soon.
I called her.  Just needed to talk.  Well better find something to do or take my lunch.  No harm between us ;)
oted me.  I'm gonna talk and see if I can make payments.  It has to get fixed.  Mom feels bad because she can't help but like I told her, that's not why
ies with all the home invasion going on.  Plus me call her when she was getting out of the shower didn't help.  So to fix my truck $1000 to $1500 Jill qu
I didn't expect you to handle it while at work. I just told you as a FYI.  Mom was upset and she said she was going to let them have it.  I know she worr
Zzzzzzzz positive thoughts. Zzzzzzzzz
I know. When are u doing Napa?
I need to eat more than apples. But want to lose wait. No harm at all. Just trying to keep.everyone happy is making me sick. Maybe that will change  soon. Talk soon.
nd it worked out well.
There and back already.  Went on February 26 and back on 29th.  Mom had a great time!  I lost my ass there!  She did use the wheelchair in the airports a
Eat something
Sorry to hear you did not win.
Happy Birthday sis!
Call or text me when you get back from your lunch and ill meet you at the.
When and where for lunch my friend?
Any time.
Now.
Where do you want to meet at? I will be ready to walk out in 15 minutes.
Ok
Will do. Trying to work that out now.
Leaving now. Going to georges on chicago.
Opps
Did ch
How is mom doing this morning? Do you need anything? Are you eating?
nly Michelle A. Is cing up so after she leaves I will head home for sleep and food.
Doc just here. She is about the same. I need a smoke.  :)  no I haven't eaten since yesterday. They brought me a sandwich last might before I went to bed. I thi
If you need me, you know i am here for you. Just call.
I know. I will call if I need to. Thank u.
What is the ip for the previous years assignment folders
This only has 2011
[IP address]
What is the status of mom? Please tell me she is stable and resting comfortable.
Not really. Having hard time with her. We almost lost her tonight. Now she is fighting me. Rough night I can foresee
I wish i could help in some way. Why are my prayers not being answered? Your mom deserves them.
Believe me I have asked that same question one thousand times today alone
I pray she has a restful night so you can get one too. Call le if you need. I will keep my cell phone next to my bed. Love to you both.
Love u too. Supposed to drive home tomorrow but don't know now
I have shared with you a folder within \assignments a folder called \old. You will find plenty of backups there.
Prayers were for your mom to make it through the night and you to get some rest. I hope they were answered. How is mom?
Did you make it home safely?
About another 2 1/2 hours away
Ok will do
Drive safely.
Made it safely. Thanks for checking on me
I worry about you. You are my BFF.
Glad you made it home safely. I bet Jeff is happy to see you. Give him my love.
My spell check. Should say BFF too
I know and u r too MY OFF. Love u so much. Will b back next week
Jeff said thank u and he sends his love too. I really think u two were ment for each other
I was just trying to ask what is an OFF? Thought it was Oldest Friend Forever
Jeff and I?
Lol. I like it though. We have our own language...always have
He loves you too much. If he had a twin, maybe the twin, but i would not take your man. Lol
Yes, I should have saw that years ago when I was married and Jacob was single and looking. I think you guys would have fell in love.
lol
No sloppy seconds.
Too many miles apart. Besides he has always loved you.
What if I give him to u?  Ha
He will not let you go and if he does, i won't like him for breaking your heart.
Only because he hadn't met I yet. And the isn't sloppy. Ha
Stop. Give him a kiss and let him reassure you of everything you are to him and for him. Heal before you have to leave again.
Hadn't met u yet...and he isn't sloppy...that's what that should have said.
Damn spell checkers.
Ur right, he wouldn't do that, but if talk had met before.  I am telling u u would have made the best pair
He is very sweet. Does he have any single friends just like him? Who might be interest in an almost 50 year old bitch?
Ur right.   Dam spell checkers
Going to say goodnight so you can spend some time with your man. Love you both very much.
Lol. Ok. Goodnight love u bunches
h her and Jack on Sat.  Love, M
e another week so I wanted to prepare u for that news. I love u and will call when I get there. I am in Atlanta until tomorrow evening and driving home to b wit
Just want to let u know I will b home sometime Saturday. They have sent mom home and they don't think she will live long. I won't b surprised if she doesn't liv
Bill Lynch wanted me to let you know that his mom passed away tonight. Please let our classmates know. Funeral will be at funeral homes. No other arrangements have been made as of yet.
Janet passed away tonight.
Tell him I am so sorry about his mom passing.
Oh no, I'm so sorry to hear that.  Please tell Mandy and Tom I'm sorry.
I'm home safe. Talk to u later today if possible.love u
So sorry just seen your message u sent me about marshas mom.please tell her were so sorry to hear about her.loss.luv u guys.
You are here already? Did you drive all night? Did Jeff drive you? Here when you need me. Love you
Will do.
I drove all night. Jeff isn't coming until later.
Tom got under armour boxers for $10.00 a pair.
Awesome
He's so happy.
How did timmy and mindy do in soccer today?
Did you see the pics posted?  They had so much fun at practice. First game April 14, @ 9am.
Oh ok we seen the pics.
It was their first practice. mindy is so excited.
She was working that hot pink outfit
Help. I need the administrator password on you gateway. If you use any other account to log in, send me that too.
Shouldn't be a password, but here are some options: [passwords]
Visitation tuesday 4 to 7pm at funeral homes. Funeral 10:00 am funeral homes, burial at cemetery immediately after on highway.
Hey Lucy, Just wanted to let you know, my virus scan software found a trojan on your computer. I am running a full scan on the drive now.
78 viruses so far.
Ok, thanks!
Might be that reason why Tom's email will send out those odd emails to everyone
I got in.
I think you are going to be happy.
I'm so happy just knowing you are working on it!!!
I am in. No data loss. Who is your favorite sister? Yes, me.
You, always have been!
Don't think I will be able to take as much time off as I want to in May.
Awesome!
I fixed the code. I placed a commend where we had a ; following the word "end" in that fprintf for loop. Code works.
At emergency room with Tom, lung is collapsing
He's stable now.
Let the puppies out for you.
Tis a bunch
I c u 617
Update?
Im calling you now
Amanda's Tom is in ICU. Cannot figue out where the blood is coming from that keeps coming out his mouth.
Oh dear. Community?  B there by 9
Yes, ICU 617.
Any news yet? Surgeon come by yet.
Amanda is leaving for the night. Not much more they can do. Amanda says stay home.
Does the diary command work for you in our code.
Any update on Tom?
Not so far. Amanda had to work this morning. I will try and call her. She should be off by now.
Ok we are praying for them.
I just tried it and it runs okay. Not running for you?
I am almost done with combining male and female. You will be proud of me. I got the output files to merge and getting ready to test it in WEKA.
Oh snap! Is it working well for you?
Now, i have to look at other file layouts for weka so i know if we have cleanup to do. I did notice that if I manually crop our photos, we can get down to 117 features.
My merge did not work correctly. I can however load the male and female output files into weka. And they work.
Lucinda, according to Amanda - Tom is stable. They are going to put a camera down his throat to see what might have happened. No new blood, he is resting comfortably now. Unsure what time they are going to start the procedure. Her number is 773-555-1212 if you want to text her or call her. Love you.
Great  thanks
Here at school Matlab works with the diary command, does not like diary via the database.
Off the respirator. Woo hoo.
Tom suffered a micro tear in his stomach by the esophogius. As long as he does not do anything to cause it to bleed again, they are planning on letting it heal itself. He is also off the ventilater. Sorry cannot spell.
Off the respirator. Woo hoo.
I cant type
Great .ews  thanks
That is awesome
Looking like closer to 6:15
Me neither.
Severe weather coming in, be careful coming home.
Yah nurse told me.
Spoke with att, they need you to call them at 1-800-555-1212. My social is 123-45-6789. They need numbers and such from your phone ti send you a warranty replacement. Are you going to the egg hunt? 10 am it starts.
Did you test my code i put up. In the new folder?
When did you upload it?
Yesterday.
I used smaller pictures so there are only 117 features. Weka likes the files.
Folder called working code with cancatination.
The code is 25 pictures but i have 100 of each male and female in the folder. We can change the code to read more pictures.
Did Tom get moved to another room?
Not when I left for the night
Molly Henderson commented on your status: done girlie girl!
Molly Henderson commented on your status: Coming his way!
Samantha Smith commented on your status: SEE!! He's no angel!!!!  LOL.  I'm almost on my way.  I was trying to pack those storage bins but I think I need more of them :-(
Molly Henderson commented on your status: Aww that is horrible - Don't understand why they can't make exceptions every once in a while.
Rachel Tanner commented on your status: i would if i knew how.
Linda Marsh commented on your status: Prayers are on the way!
Rachel Lee Dobbs commented on your status: Sending lots of prayers to Papa Smith!
Jamie Martek commented on your status: That's what they say.."Gotta love'em or.....(you fill in the blank)
Room 617. Bed 2
Sara Smith on your wall: You unfriendly me?!?!?  Reply with your comment or "like".
Sara Smith commented on your Wall post: It made me send you a friend request to post on your wall....did you get my text???
Sara Smith commented on your Wall post: Can you call Mandy and see if she was serious about a puppy....Wilma has some people interested....especially coconut and pistachio
Tom still in the hospital?
Yes room318
I hope to see him tomorrow since I have to take mom to the eye doctor.
Martha Washeck commented on your link:Yes I always "BELIEVE" and I dont believe that GOD or the ANGEL...
Susan Migdal commented on your status: Thanks!!
Yes, check your path and reopen the file.
Call me when you leave the house, ill come down and meet you at the door.
The problem was I was running 'project' which is a Matlab function and not Project.m the name of the script.
Sounds familiar.
Rachel Lee Dobbs commented on your status: I love my Verizon HTC Incredible 2
Samantha Smith commented on your photo. Boys.... LOL  Reply with your comment or "like".
Mike Barns commented on your status: Verizon!
Misty Partle commented on your status: Where's she goin to have it done at??
Where r u? Herb shipmentÄ
Rachel Tanner commented on your status: yes. she will..look out..woo hoo
Misty Partle commented on your status: Oh okay.
Shannon Golby commented on your status: We will have to be more careful when making fun of her. LOL
Rachel Lee Dobbs commented on your status: Why did she change her mind?
Doctor was good speaker who presented the outcome in terms she could relate to.
Molly Henderson commented on your status: Watch out!  Bet she still won't want to sit in the front seat, she'd be able to be a back seat driver.  Love and hugs to mom!
Hi cindy, this is Marsha I'm running late I will be there soon
in 10 mins.*
Samantha Smith commented on your status: I am sad that I cannot see Rachel's FB :-(
Samantha Smith commented on 'Samantha Smith's Wall post: Didn't get to go
Samantha Smith commented on your status: I can't see her tagged in your post which means she has me blocked
Sara Smith commented on your status: They don't come up tagged for me either....
Samantha Smith commented on your status: Sucks to be us.
mindy's jersey is here and so is a box for you.
Thank you.
Hey where u want to meet for lunch and what time is good for u??  I can make it any time and will go to library at school after ee have lunch.
Are you on campus?
Let me call you.
No not on campus.
pharmacy package came today.
Thanks for having lunch with me. I enjoyed seeing you.
(4/4) on the books so I will b close if I can find the  materials by the time I get back from Great Lakes.
(3/4)  in instead and just take a day of leave.  At least I got some hours in this week with the conference calls.  That helps.  I still have 80 hours of leave
(2/4) om Amazon.  Worried about how I am going to get 4 hours of work on tomottow without the materials I need.  Oh well, guess I will get a lot of packing time
(1/4) U too. sorry I didnt find u befote I left .  They didnt have the books I needed just as u said so I didnt stay long.  I guess I will have to order them fr
What is the name of the book?
Call cook county library. I will check out the book for you. You can have it delivered to Chicago from any Cook County branch and check it out for two weeks.
(2/2) lassrooms.  Will a library carry a specialized rating scale like that?  I figured school would because they have a lab school, but apparently not..
(1/2) ITERS and ECERS they are both environmental rating scales for day care centers.  ITERS is for infant and Toddler classrooms.  The other is for preschool c
Maybe. It could be a reference book that might prevent it from being able to be checked out.
Yes  I didnt ask about that.  U r probably right.
Do you need the form?
There is a form for iters
What form?
Jill H. Farmer commented on your status: Loved being with you too.  I am starting to want to stay here.  I never thought I'd see the day I would want to come back home to stay, but I find I miss my best friend so much, I want to stay!
Don't make me cry
Samantha Smith commented on your status: :-(
Jill H. Farmer commented on your status: I about made myself cry cuz its true.  I really am wanting to just come  HOME.
Add folder for prof smith to the students folders as in his email. Password needs to be password123
Susie needs prof smith's key returned soon. Also, come by my office and swap out monitor with one in rm 50 please.
Susie Niles commented on your status: Good Luck Mama D , we will be waiting for you guys in Fl. !!! We  are going to universal next week to see Harry Potters. If ya win :))) See ya there :))
Susie Niles commented on your status: Caleb was but now its Hunger Games, but they say its nice there
Susie Niles commented on your status: Would rather be at the beach myself, the things we do for our kids :))))
Samantha Smith commented on your status: IDK if Heather can see my posts but if not tell her I send my hugs.
You have been poked on Facebook by 'Samantha Smith.  Reply "p" to poke 'Samantha back.
Paul Crabtree accepted your friend request.
Tom is in Allentown, PA
Tom ate 2.5 pieces of lasagna.
You have been poked on Facebook by Susie Lynch.  Reply "p" to poke Susie back.
That does not surprise me.
He has never had my lasgna. He did not know it was going to be addictive.
He agrees with you.
It is so good!
He knows good food
Hey you awake?
Well its 4am and I have been back at the hosp for 5 hrs now. Tom is back in icu. Bed 617.
I need lucy s cell #. Can you send it?
Yes
Hey you awake yet?
7735551212
Just sent it. Whats up
Need lucys cell #.
Call Amanda asap.
Lori, your dad had a relaps. Call Amanda.
Have mom call Momma Amanda. Very important. Grandpa is back in icu.
Susie Niles commented on your status: Sending them to you & Aunt L & Unc B !
Stacy Rayez commented on your status: Prayers coming your way!!!
Sara Smith commented on your status: :'( call me please???
I tried.
On my way over. See you soon.
Michelle Blanch commented on your status: Absolutely.. Prayers on way!
Mike Barns commented on your status: Toughts and prayers for all of you.
Heather Yougoht commented on your status: Marv was just asking if Amanda had posted any updates just last night, will send up prayers for him
I am here
Tom is in ICU 617 coughed up blood again and coded.
No. I am so sorry.  I am in wheaton attending  church.  Will call  u  when I get out.
No worries. At hospital. Waiting for visiting hours to start
I talked to Amanda...thanks for getting a hold of me.
Marsha Scone commented on your status: prayers sent...
We are going to have lunch at your house
On our way up
How is he.  Whats goinh on.  Should I come up there
He is in a drug induced coma and drug induced paralysis. Holding his own right now. I have to leave soon to go to work. He is in 617 icu if you want to come up.
How is Amanda
Not in a good place, but optimistic.
She is in with him now. I will have her text you.
Does she want me to come sit with her
Ok thanks
Gotta go.
Gabby s # is wrong
Rachel Tanner commented on your status: prayers from papa b and me..
Does she want me to come sit with her
Molly call Amanda 13125551212
Lindsay Jelks commented on your status: sending prayers...
Tim Schreibersen commented on your status: Praying for you all!
Nana Bulben commented on your status: Im so sorry!  Poor guy just cant seem to catch a break!
The passwords you gave me were correct. Thank you again. Have a great weekend.
Stacy Nickles commented on your status: Prayers being sent up for your family.  It was great to see you & your Mom yesterday - you did a great job with the frames !!
Susie Leffner commented on your status: good news sister.
Do you think that Tom knows something and told them not to say anything to her?
Melinda Vaughan commented on your status: How's your brother in law doing?
Melinda Vaughan commented on your status: That's so  sad how's Amanda holding up?    The family's in my prayers.  May god heal!!
Stacy Rayez commented on your status: hope all goes well and will keep you all in my prayers!!!! So sorry :(
Melinda Vaughan commented on your status: Glad to hear he's holding his own.  Keep us posted on how he's doing
Melinda Vaughan commented on your status: If he was my  husband   I would have to move him to university of Chicago.  You need answers.  What hospital is he at now
Lisa Richardson on your wall: Give Amanda and  Tom our love and prayers for his recovery.  We are keeping them in our thoughts.  Reply with your comment or "like".
Are you still taking mom to her eye apt today? I can do it if you want.
Iwill take her, do not worry - just share some of package with me around 420
She is the one worrying. I figured if you needed to have me do it, you would ask.
It will be a distraction
Keep me posted on Tom please. Prayers are continuing to pour in.
I will and thanks
Wheel chair is in the garage.
No its in the honda
Sara Smith commented on your status: What time is grammas appointment??? Our phone are both dead :( silly Michael grabbed the wrong charger :( waiting for the buffet to open...apparently they don't have a breakfast buffet
Roger Jimbarn commented on your status: Glad to hear there is improvement. Still praying!
Doing bronch scope at 2pm
Jack Gable commented on your status: Maybe this?
Linda Nunez Wall post: Thanks cindy!!
Jessica Rubles commented on your status: I'm glad we got to see each other for a few minutes on Saturday...I'm here if you need anything.
Its Sara where are you?!
Please take down the fb post.
Samantha has not called anyone.
Call patricia 7735551212
Thank you.
Taken care of.  She will let Mandy and the rest know.
Anything to help out.
Like rolling papes fo yo weed? Nope all out beautiful
that black tar aint no junk to mess with
no no man I just smoke weed now
my man
What r u doing I just woke up I got a head ache boo
yeah that horse be too strong to ride, don't mess with junk
yeah? Since when?
hey u getting over that patico?
Care if me and boyfriend come over ???
wanna go horse riding later?
since I got busted for possession of marijuana
haha im totally amped right now
Im not home. Call u later
sure sounds fun
oh shit I didn't know
answers that question
Is there anything I can do?  lucy
I will call you soon.
Yes.
Did father O'Malley call?
Tomy Trump on your wall: cindy and Family, Our hearts and prayers go out to you and Amanda and the whole family for the loss of UncleTom at 6:30 tonight. May god be with everyone and give you all the strength that you will need to get through this rough and sad time in your lives. Our thoughts and prayers are with all of you. Love The Trump's  Reply with your comment or "like".
Okay I'm get in a showe my head is pounding
I heard that skag mighta been laced with something, like maybe PCP
yeah sucks
hey u still got hookup for smack?
I dont mean to bug u but I feel like shit. Ive been throwin up all day. Can I start headin out ur way? It takes me like 45min to get there
thats whack. You cant mix antifreeze with wicky junk
we can hang out somewhere else instead of ur house if me bringing shrooms freaks u out or anything
for u or for someone else?
Rachel van Norman on your wall: So sorry to hear the news cindy. I am glad he was with his family when it happened. My thoughts are with you.  Reply with your comment or "like".
Samantha Towers commented on your status: They are in my prayers. I am very sorry for your loss :(
Larry Roper commented on your status: So sorry for your loss.  My prayers are with you and your family.
Jeff Smith commented on your status: Sorry to hear that, in my prayers
Leave at 9 30
I know, smack + anything is usually a bad idea
no no man I don't care, I just won't be hitting em
for me
Im here
heroin is bad stuff
hey I got this girl who's a total coke whore I might bring by
u dont do smack, tell me the truth
Max Rumplestiltskin commented on your status: Love you cindy
I forgot to tell you Tom's mom is in ICU bed 8. She was mot doing well. You may want to call him if you get a chance.
Alexandria Smith commented on your status: Oh so sorry for your family's loss. You are all in my prayers!
Carol Patrick commented on your status: Everyone is in my prayers. Love u all
Im parked in the middle lane in front of Stracks. In a Red camero
yes heroin is horrible
friend of urs or a snack to share?
ok its a close friend, someone I trust.
K
so is acid for that matter
snack of course
man I keep my friends close and my skag closer
Do u have six dollars I can borrow till I get my tips mike?
yeah LSD is no good, one bad trip can mess you up for life
snort some lines and choo choo
I know but this guy aint a rat, he just needs his fix of chiva
Nice of him to let me know   I dont know how to reach him.  What is wrong wirh Layla?
She had a chemo treatment, needed blood, and when she gets these transfusions, her lungs fill up with fluid and she ends up in the hospital unable to breathe. Apparently, she coded yesterday morning.
Omg.  I cant believe he never told me she is sick much less has cancer.
Can i call you now
Stage 4 breast cancer. His dad is not doing good either. His heart.
Dont worry. Talk later.
I am getting dressed.  Late for work but can I call I when I leave my room?
heather mayes on your wall: Mama D please pass on our love and sorrow  to Aunt Amanda !! So very sorry !! She is in my thoughts and prayers ! She has very strong women to help her through this . Dont forget to laugh about everthing good about Tom !! Much LOVE to you and Amanda and family !!  Reply with your comment or "like".
How are you and everyone doing today?  Just know I am keeping you close~love you.  lucy
Sorry just got home hun. Uugghh I need a joint soo bad. Hows ur head?
I heard about a guy who was trippin and jumped out of a 5th story window, thought he could fly
she gotta have blow or crack ok?
k but this chiva be black tar he experienced?
I need some blow.  Ill buy.
that kinda crap is happening a lot nowadays with those bath salts
blow
yeah he can handle his antifreeze
Are you home today
No heading home soon. Gettimg my cap and gown right now
I am pretending to be strong. Getting my cap and gown.
Ok.
Do i need to call you
No, checking.g in.
Home
Going.
Almost there
like ivory junk?
gotcha ill get some blow fo sho
hey devon I pay u even better than 85 I got schmeck
gements yet?  How is she?  Love you.  lucy
I'm sorry~its hard to pretend, I know.  Cap and gown for graduation next month~exciting!  I'm here if you need me.  Have you helped Amanda with any arran
Jessica boys brother jake shot last nite.isnt that fuckd up.the kid who shot him jus drove off n left him to die but they arrestd him
yeah, people be eating their own poop and eating people's faces off and stuff
hey devon I need some nose candy
the real tecate?
Damn thats crazy. How r they doin?
WHAT?!? That's like zombie shit
it gonna cost u
ya
Theyr pretty torn up
yeah those bath salts make ppl do crazy shit
I know that how much?
I might even have to throw in some XTC
I bet how sad. I didnt no they had another brother
now that isn't the same as that salvia stuff is it?
8 ball blow run u 85
yeah this girl might wanna roll on some XTC
Yea n he had jus had a baby 4 months ago too
no, bath salts are different from salvia
thats steep
yeah they like rollin on E
How is Amanda doing?
Free T-Mobile Msg: We have canceled a line from your account as of 04/03/2012. For account details view the information on my.t-mobile.com.
salvia is like weed, but makes you trip more than chill
ill throw in some dro
add some coke to the mix and we got ourselves a party
Speaking with them now.
Free T-Mobile Msg: Payment for $94.00 posted to your account on 04/03/2012. Details at my.t-mobile.com
oic
k where u at
am I invited to this party?
jake od'd last night if you didn't hear by now - too much smack
Joe popped my balloon today
my crib
of course
Sending love, hugs and strength.  I wish I could take the pain away.  lucy
Gram mentioned she would like to know what is going on but doesn't want to interrupt. If you get a chance can you call her??
7735551212 john doe
Got it  thank u so much.  Love u
I heard
Oh well
cu in 20
thx for the tecate
Tom said if Amanda needs him as a Paul bare he will.
What do you wanna do for the pictures tomorrow?
Tom is going to be cremated.
I am going to get mine together soon. I think Amanda found some. Sara is looking too.
Love you too.
Alrighty me and myndad are taking care of it too.
other group is sending some as well.
Okay so are we gonna make the video tomorrow?
I hope to. If not tomorrow thursday
Alrighty keep me posted. Thank you for including me
So sad :(
hey I got some shrooms
hey I got coke for tonight
Ok.  Didn't know that.
Have to leave Sunday.  Can't have Monday off.  Sorry
We will celebrate Easter and Toms birthday on Saturday.
Ok
Toms mom passed away this morning. He just posted something on fb.
Services at funeral homes saturday from 3 - 8 pm. Posted on his page.
Toms mom passed away today.
Uncle Toms mom passed away today. Funeral arrangements on his page.
Oh no, I'm so sorry to hear that
He posted something a few minutes ago, but she passed this morning.
Tom's mom passed this morning.
Thanks cindy.
Should be in around 4:30
Have you guys read the obituary yet? Did someone call the times already or would you like me to?
Could you call them please. I saw it, but i want to get these pictures scanned.
Yes, we will.
Can you give me a quick phone call. 5551212
Tom's mom passed away yesterday. Visitation is Saturday @ 3-8pm.
How do spell mindys name
MindarellaÄ I dunno
In Rockford now.
Just checking in on you; how are you holding up?  Love you .  lucy
Grandma is in the hospital.
I will say a prayer for her.
Happy Birthday Belinda. I hope you go out for drinks tonight.
No just sitting in my room crying actually.  But thank u.
Hl
On my way
OK. See you soon.
.5 hours
What time is the service for Tom tomorrow and is it at place where moms was?
10 am sharp. At funeral home where mom was.
Thanks. Ill b there.
Thank you for supporting us last night. It meant so very much to me. I love you.
I love you like you were my sister if I had one.  I will be holding you in my heart today.  lucy
U coming to the funeral home
Horrible fight. Finally got there at 7 pm.
With who
I am getting drunk.  Want ro meet me and Mindy for drinks
No, took nerve pill. Cannot drink.
Yes.
???
Family flight
So sorry.
Have a blessed Easter
Thank you. You too.
Hi cindy, please wish everyone a happy easter from us....i hope you are having a more relaxing day.
Yes, we are. Much was said last night when i came home after taking Amanda home. Lucy actually left last night. Mom, Sara, Michael and I cleared the air in many aspects. Does not mean things are better, but conversations that needed to be said. How is michelle? I hope your Easter is pleasant and relaxing as well. Sorry you had to witness the outbursts yesterday. I am so sorry you were forced to witness such immaturity under the given circumstances. I apologize for my families actions. It was inappropriate.  Love and best wishes for today.
Thanks cindy and don't worry about it. Every family has its issues. I just hope tings keep getting better for you guys. Thinking of you. Love you.
Oh yeah, michelle is doing a little better. She is still achy and has a sore throat, better her fever is gone for now. Thanks for asking.
I left $20, Toms memory card and my lip earring in your pants
I found the lip ring and Michael has it. I will get the others out of the jeans
Thanks!!!
Rachel had blocked me now also.
The $20 was Bob's so I feel bad :-/
She defriended me and adam but didn't block as far as I know. Tom is still my friend
No
Did you see his reply on Sara's post?
Thinking about you today.  lucy
And I of you. I meant to call yesterday, but i never got around to it. Sorry.
At ER with Bob. Split eye lid open.
No worries~i know you had a lot going on.  How are you feeling?   How do you think Amanda is doing?  You both have been on my mind.  Take care of yourself!
We just got brought back to see the doctor.
What is the status on Bob?
Samantha is at the hospital with Bob. He split his eye lid open.
What next?  We need to do a cleansing or something at your house~holy water, candles and prayers.  Let me know how he is.
Well, Bob got three stitches.
At least two stitches are coming.
Today is Robert Johnson's birthday.
Bob got three stitches by his eye today as well.
Hope he's ok now.  How are you holding up?
Yes. I wished Mike last night cuz remembered our bds r close. Wnat happended to Bob?
Do you have school tonight?  Would like to talk with you.
Keeping busy to keep my mind off of it.
No. I do not.
You know where to find me.  Xoxo
Fine, I tried and told mom I was going to.  Good bye, I will send your computer back.
Wait, i replied i do not have school tonight. I answered your question
Are your Asian professors Chinese or Japanese?
Chinese and korean why
In was looking for someone that knew chinese so I don't end up with the wrong symbols.
I have a student worker who knows chinese
Fell.
Yeah read it on Facebook last night
I got your voice mail.
Hey cindy, am I supposed to be at this spring convocation right now. He sent it to tech support and it says mandatory...
Who sent it, jim?
Yup
Ok.
th ago.    Thank you.   It shipped out the Monday after you went off the deep end. If she didn't get it she needs to contact me not you.
I would appreciate it is you would talk with your daughter about stirring shit up again.  I asked her to please send out an item my friend ordered a mon
K. Just saw emails. Was calling in regards.
In a traing session until 3:30
either so FUCK OFF!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
I'm sorry to bring you into this, but I am going to contact someone about her harassment.   You are such a bitch. Mom has nothing to do with my business
(2/2)I wasn't sure if they could exchange one piece or would need to do them all??
(1/2)Can you call pharmacy and ask about the pans. It looks like there are areas where the coloring might be botched. You'd have to ask adam for specific details but
U awake?
Mom wa s wondering when she could call you.
Whats up?
My moms surgery is cancelled tomorrow, the Dr had an emergency~she has to call tomorrow to try to reschedule.  lucy
Bummer. She was so looking forward to this.
Oh, i am so sorry. I hope he can reschedule her quickly.
She can barely walk~we got a wheelchair for her now
I will keep you posted when we find out more tomorrow.
Ok.
Surgery is on for April 23~the Dr has the flu.  lucy
Hi cindy, this is Rachel I'm on my way running late.
MichelleKing asked about your camper tonight on fb. She wanted to know the size, year, and model. Any info you want me to pass along.
Just checking in on you today.  Hope you are ok.  Love you, lucy
Thank you & Amanda for the card and the beautiful note inside.  Hope you are doing ok.  Love, lucy
Rich Smith may want to purchase your html book. What  price are you willing to sell it for?
(1/2)mindy and James have been begging me to stay with you. Would you have time for them this weekend? I am still really nervous about them being around grandma but
(2/2)I don't like making them and you suffer because she is too selfish to care about us.
There is a going away party for us at the McCormick Center tomorrow night at 630.  Ur family is welcome. Dinner too.
I am not sure. I have two weeks of classes left and i am behind. I will let you know soon.
Thank you. I will try to come. When do you head back to orlando?
I am not sure I understand completely, you will let me know if they can this weekend or not this weekend but maybe later?
About this weekend. I have my directed project to finish, a paper to write, and two labs to finish and a wake tonight for Papa.
Papa didn't make it?!?! Oh no!!!
Good morning, I woke up this morning not feeling very well so I will be a little late. I will be in as soon as possible
That is fine. I am running late too.
Are you in yet?
Yea
Mike Smith and jacks. halsted and fullerton. Attorney you should call. Just got popped with possession of MJ
s for kids.
Nope sure don't. Not me, thats for sure.
Soccer game at 1:30 today. Same place.
did he catch u wit a roach or a bunch of sticks, or worse?
My mom is in recovery now, haven't seen her yet.  Dr said all went well~i will keep you posted~thanks for your prayers!
Any word yet?
home already.
She is in a room now.  Dr was pleased with procedure.  She has pain meds today in a drip.  Pt starts tomorrow.  She is in good spirits and wants to come
How are you?  How is Amanda?  Love you.
I ak ok. Working on homework. Amanda not so good. She has to find a roommate  or face losing her house.
Love you too. Tell mom i said hello and no running. It is too early for that.
Sorry to hear that~wish I knew someont.  How many more days of class?
She is ready to get out of there!
I have two more classes and a final. This week wednesday and next week wednesday. I have a presentation due this week.
Do you want me to bring in my laptop tonight?  Will I be seeing you tonight?  Need to finalize graduation
Ok
I will be here. Do not bring your laptop just yet. John Doe owes me some documentation first.
I told mom that we did not say anything to her in hopes I could fix it without her getting wound up over it.
ork to run?
ry running this application again."  That is the same message that I received over the weekend.  Is it possible that The computer must be on our school netw
cindy, I received the following message after clicking on the disk drive to install the lion OS.   "An error occurred while preparing the installation. T
Should not. I have Michelle laptop. I will try on hers and see what happends.
Are u back in town?
Yes
Ken just spoke with Professor Smith. The presentations are next week.
Yes, thank you for that bit of news.
;)
Rocky Jimbo gave me the name of the attorney.
Nice. Hope something good comes out of it for you.
He is going to conduct a phone interview with me monday at 3pm.
I just hope he gets me off!
Me too.
I am going to ultra to get some of the ham for hoggies do you want any?
I cannot send my paper tonight. I am having internet problems. If not up soon, i will send as soon as it is restored or when i can get somewhere where i can gain access. Maybe from hospital tomorrow or my sisters house. Enjoy your time in Indy.
Ok. But try to get Jody to arrange a presentation day and time.  Susie may need to help.
Yes. Mabel said nothing will happen today because of computer science day going on.
Inquiry on maytag washer and dryer. Age, working condition, gas or electronic dryer?
9 yrs works    I'll send photos
Gas
Is the dryer gas or electric?
Let me know if your interested becuz I have someone coming tonight to look at them.
I have another woman saying she has a pair that are 5 yrs old for $300. Wanting to look at those too.
Ok no problem
Still may be interested. But take first offer. I understand.
Ok thank you
Surgery pushed back again. Looks like 2:00 pm.
Sorry dude. Hows it going?
K.
Not bad. Just talking with people.
Knock em out dude.
Feisty!
Mom is arguing with the nurse. Telling them not to piss her off, or she will not come back for the other eye.
Yes. Sometimes too feisty for her own good.
She cracks me up!!!
How is the soccer game going?
What?
Mom says tv is really bright.
How's her vision?
Saturday games starts at 9:30 am. Pictures at mccormick center 8:45 am.
Realized that after I sent it
Cool, how does she feel?
Blurry. She has normal eye swelling. But colors are really bright and intense.
Eye is still itchy.
Are we going to wrigleyville? I am punching out now.
If you are up to it. If you need sleep, i understand. Mom is napping now. She is so funny.
How anout 1?
That is fine with me. Gives you time to relax a bit. If you want it can even be a later on as well.
Pictures at mccormick center at :45 tomorrow.
(3/3)thinking about grilling dinner.
(2/3)with you, you are more than welcome to. We will be back out tomorrow after we have the Honda looked at because I have a party at 3 in Naperville. We were
(1/3)adam and I were discussing and came up with this: he is going to take the kids to the jump thing tonight. If you would like to attend and invite mindy home
What?
I think 530-8
What time is the jump thing tonight?
Ok. I will talk it over with grandma.
Coach said 530-830.
We left the plants. Can you put them in the garage or at least under the bench in case it frosts?
Yes i will put them in the garage.
Thanks!
Actually in the kitchen.
We have arrived at jump. Samantha wanted me to let you know
Leaving now
OK. Still jumping with reckless abandon
I'm here.
We are in the red room
Thanks!!!
The kids were awake until 12:30 am.
Mom says it looks good. Like the color of the wall.
Thank you for showing her.  Tell her thanks!!
No problem. Any time.
Hello did u get it?
Hello cindy, I'm meeting with my group will be there in 20 mins.
I will be in a meeting until 4 in case anyone is looking for me
Hey cindy I'm here in town. I'm here in wrigleyville for the nite
I saw your changes to the power point. Just finished my work on the paper.
What time do u think u will get into ur office at? Should I slide my time sheet under ur door
I am in a training until 11:30. Slide under door if you want or leave in my mailbox.
I think i need to purchase one of those vibrators for my headaches. What price ranges are we looking at?
I saw Ken like the playboy bunny :)
How did the bullet work for you?
Not.
that sucks! :(
My head is killing me.
Sorry to hear.
Gas @ family express in Chicago, $3.59 a gal.
Sorry. at hospital with Grandma Smith
didnt see the post i tagged you in?
No
Storm coming in, thunder, lightening and lots of rain :)
Severe weather warning until midnight.
Got 15.6 gallons of gas last night.  Not a long wait, either~thanks to you!  lucy
Yeah.
Mom wants to know if you could take her to the grocery store today. Needs a few items. Nothing big.
Yes get off at 1130#
Anytime today would be fine. If you need a short nap, take it. She does not mind. At dr apt now.
Would I be able to convince you to bring two dvi cables up to the office?
Sure
I have a butterfly in the office
I didn't forget about you (C++ code). Pipe broke in the wall, house flooded, haven't had my Internet hooked up so I can't email it to you yet.
If not up by tomorrow I will run to Starbucks and ensure you get it
Don't worry. I will see what else i can figure out on my own. Take care of the water issues.
I will def get it to u by tomorrow, don't worry
I am more worried about your house than homework.
that wall so we're good
lol I am not worried: praise God for homeowner's insurance. My only expense is the plumbing, which isn't too bad. And we don't have anything valuable on
I am sorry, but i have a migraine.
I'm running late I'm on my way now this is cindy.
I forgot to tell you, read the Minds paper prof smith posted. A question will be on the test relating to this article.
I emailed code btw
Thx
Ok thanks.
138 out of 150. Thats a 92.
You go girl.
good to start with.
do you have any large boxes at work? I have to ship something 4feet long 1foot wide and 6inches tall. I could make a box but I don't really have anything
Will u be at school before the exam at all?
Hey cindy, this is cindy I am running late I have to meet with my group and fix my report.
Ok
Sorry, I do not.
Yes i will be. No sense in going home for that little time.
Ok  count me in
At 5:30
Cool. Meeting Carl up b4 class to go over math for exam
Me and Luke are headed to bw3's in wheaton
Gonna pass 2nite. I have to present tomorrow. Need to go over my ppt one more time and print final document.
Good luck!
You know, if you did it for me, it would make on easier on me.
Haha
Thought you would like that.
I did it.
I agree
Yeah!!!
Thanks.
Congrats!
lucy, i did it.
I knew you would!  So proud of you!
Thanks sweetie.
I am sure you are relieved too!  Once you are all done with everything, we need to spend some time together!  Miss you
We need to scrap!
You can say that again!
My friend with the breast cancer has a cancer polyp~ not good
Oh no. I am so sorry.
Hey cindy, this is Cindy I will bed running a little late but I will be there as soon  as I can make it
Are you home? We are still in our dept meeting.
I'll be home in about 30 minutes
Ok. Still in dept meeting. No hurry
I'm home
I just left the meeting.
Ok
On my way.
Just an fyi, we dont have the money for the student loan. At all.
Well, then we are in trouble
it has to get paid or it all comes due now.
i am sick. I cant really talk.
Call me
Well, i don't know what you expect me to do. You said they were going to review it. I don't have it either. And i cannot borrow from anyone.
they were suppose to but apparently the government did some update to the system and they havent swept any loans as of yet. I told you this before.
No, i do not recall you mentioning anything about this.
yep. Last couple months when you've asked.
Games still on.
jim approved your maymester hours of 1 to 4 pm. Please have all students sign the sign-in sheet and put down the course number. I have to report to him weekly the number os students for which courses.
don't forget package at 10. Just wanted to let you know. some green herbs need a home
Are they here yet?
Are they here yet?
Nope >
So whatss on todays agenda?
Hi cindy, this is Cindy just wanted to wish you a Happy Mothers Day!
Happy Mothers Day.  Just finished the MS Walk.
Happy Mother's day to you as well Cindy, and Thank you
Thank you, Monica. Happy Mother's day to you as well.
Happy mothers day and may god cont. To bless u on this wonderful day
Wish your mom a Happy Mother's Day for me.
Thank You Jeanette. I passed my exams. I get my Master's in computer science on May 20th.
Heading that way soon.
Ok
Happy mother's day
Same to you love
Open labs will be held in bldg A beginning tomorrow and thursday until then end of Maymester classes. June 8 ends that semester.
Susie needs help with completing the project tasks for tonight meeting. She asked if I could assist her. Will this be ok with you.
Sure
Fyi,  school is having email issues. Outlook not working, entourage for Macs not working either.
I know. I called help support and made them aware 30 minutes ago. Thanks
I also about an hour ago. It is getting worse.
Good thing for messaging
Yes, i am using aim with my guys.
jim did give me permission to work with you. I will come by after the meeting if you still need me to.
Yes.  Please
Ok. I will be there after my meeting with jim. He is due back here around 1 pm.
Bring your laptop when you come
Are we still meeting today?
I'm on the way back to campus now
Yes
Ok. Text or call me when you get here.
I'm taking a short nap before the meeting at 4
Ok.
are you coming?
Strong arm robbery on Michigan Ave, suspect may be in bldg nearby. Check CNN for updates
Timesheets!!
Tomorrow
Ok
Do you have a graduation party planned?  We could invite grad students here if you want?  Anyone you want. Only if you do not have previous plans....
I forgot to ask. Any chance you could keep the kids the 25th?
I have no money for a party. I am a poor grad student.
how much per joint? good quality?
Yes
You got any fatties?
Plz share :P
how bout u swing by and sample some with me
Yeah
Hey, what is person's email address?
person@email.com
swinging by soon
if selling I'd buy much more, not that ballsy (yet)
personal use only
Is this recreational or u selling it too?
:)
1500
see ya
Will do thx
Let me know when close, I'll meet u by my car
in parking lot
Ok.
I see u
Hey cindy, on my way running a little late
So, who all is going to graduation on sunday? Seating starts at 5 pm. Commencement begins at 6  and will last about 2 hours. Theater.
Id like to if you have room
I have enough tickets for all of you.
Thank you for tonight=i love you so much.  Looking forward to Sunday!  lucy
Ok.
Hey, got a question for you. Is Tommy Harper related to you? He is in kindergarten at Fictitious School in Chicago.
No relation.
Ok. This little boy is in my grandson's class and thought maybe?
Nah. Anytime you see a Harper and it isn't me, my dad or my wife there is no relation.
Ticket?
I forgot last night. I will today soon.
No worries!  Are you excited?  I am!  Going to my moms around noon.
If you leave it taped To your door I will go that way before I head out
Hello congrat. On your master n computer science have a  great day love u much
Can i drop off some food by you now?
Yes
On my way
123 main st
Does Rachellike red or white wine?
Red
Cool u said u will be there around 8?
How late is she going?
After
K lmk when u head that way
Ok be there in a few
Now.
I am leaving  theater now.
Hows the weather?
Leaving now. Raining really bad out here.
And remind me again of where Rachellives
Ok.
Drive safe in this weather!
My wife is heading home from McDonalds then we will leave
Ok kewl
I'll bet not
I am not moving very quickly right now.
U drive safe too.
Remind me how to get there when u get a chance (or just send me address)
123 main st
Thx
Not raining in Chicago.
I got tied up sorry. I am leaving soon. Is it ok to stop by?  training is now available free online
Yes
How you feeling today? What time are you leaving work today?
Congrats again. I can now text
Love you.
Love U2
Apparently there's a beer fest going on this weekend. You wouldn't happen to know if you can get tickets at the door would you? My inlaws are coming and
I have to keep them occupied... Haha
Yes amber and I r going and mike is going with us
My mom lives across the street so we are parking/chilling there
$30/ticket, VIP sold out so I would buy online before general sells out
Still available
U can get tickets online or thru eventbrite
Cool, will they still let you in if you don't buy a ticket (Jenny might not want to drink anything)..
She can get in for $5 as a DD
Ok cool
Just got the meeting invite from bob young.  How did it go?
It is tomorrow. He had a date typo.
I replied and lost the meeting notice. Time, place,?
Tomorrow 2:30 pm bldg A rm 22
I passed the course today.
Congratulations!
Thank You
Congratulations cindy! Your Graduation Photos are now available online. Go to www.gradimages.com and enter your last name smith and customer # 123456789
nd a ride I am still likely to be late.
Hello cindy, this is me I'm once again having car trouble trying to look for transportation but things aren't looking too great right now but if I do fi
630 and 730 who's in who's out
I'm in wheaton till pretty late won't make it. I glanced at the calendar the other day and noticed half the season is gone and I still haven't made a game
I probably should just back out at this point, my apologies
That's okay we can try again later
Your time card is due also.
I'm not going to make it couldn't get ahold of anyone just my luck sorry.
How is/did your IS meeting go?
Reflect it on your time sheet.
Sent you an email.
Ok
Didn't see it yet
It shows timestamp of 4:44pm
Did you really want the kids Sunday night?
Love. From .
Love U2
Love you more.giving lessons on how to talk on phone.
Melinda Bob son isbeatiful
We are meeting up at my mom's around 2pm, and she is making hot dogs and hamburgers afterwards
You are welcome to join us, she lives across the street so it is great parking
Just lmk if so so I can plan how much food
Sorry, we aren't going, Jenni's family isn't coming..  And sorry I slept through your texts I was up until 3:30 working on my car.
No prob lol
store has those short cones they use at practice in the discount area for $2.50
Going to hardware store.
..}Twelve noon top of morning to both of you.
You must still be there. Does meijers price match? I had to get a rain check on the pool target was out today but meijers is supposed to carry acording to web site.
Top o the morning to ya
Your late. Already been to aunt marys and church.
Nice
I'm such a pothead
Amanda has someone lined up to move in with her. Waiting for their lease to end first.
I head back on wednesday.Ok thanks I will let Jack know. Love u
The kids said you mentioned them staying tonight?
I sure did
R u all coming by today?
Doea Amanda room and or want tqo rommates?.  Bob is on tears  and wants to stay here
Amanda only has a two bedroom house.
There is no way she can take both.
R u sure that it was today not tomorrow
Yes.
Gotcha... I found dragan and the email he has from them says tomorrow.. but he is checking to see if its ok to just do it today
Funny
Hey did u get the payment from Chicago? Can't remember. I know you delivered the cocaine
I need a letter from you and bob. Giving you both permission medically over me and to let me go.
I already wrote u one, what did u do with it?
New doctor also dr smith
630 & 730 tonight who's in who's out.
Out
Mom's surgery went well
cindy where is the disk with the files?  Jeff will work with adam at lab before noon today, according to Julie
Yea that's great to hear.  Tell I love her and take it easy.
Game just canceled
I want my son to help collect onmoney owed me.at same time help with end thoughts?
How so?
Talk when we can.i talk on phone easyer.text is for young generation.
lol k
Smile think postive and believe in something greater called christ. You cant change the plan.it is made?
I got some of that hydro good stuff
Man I don't need any of that skunk tho
Well you do your line on the table and ill toke my marijuana
crack rock? That's crazy
Nick sent a message last night saying the computer booted up just fine around 10pm.
r section
jim, the assect folder is in the faculty folder on server
Jenny was thinking about going hiking for a bit if the chicago taste of downtown thing turns out to be lame or overpriced. Would you guys be interested in that?
I think so. They are still painting at our house, so not sure when they will be done, probably within 1-2 hours.
Do you guys have to be there while they're finishing up?
Yeah one of us
We don't know them personally
Plus we gotta lock up when they're done
That's fine we'll head downtown in an hour to scope it out and give you a call
Sounds good
Painters are done, we just need to remove furniture for Monday night, probably another hour or so
Ok, we're leaving our apartment now, we'll call you in 15 or 20 minutes
Want us to meet u up somewhere?
I'm in town today, what u doing?
At a friends in chicago what u doing tomorrow?
Nada
Let's shoot for tomorrow
amber is going to her dads so I am free most of the day.
K
They doing something tomo?
Her biological dad out in hyde park area
Lol k
I don.t want to fight with anyone.i have problem. I cannot put anything together.friend camebuy and fix phonecell.a.a thankyou
Oki ambored and ready to go to casino, who else is ready?
I will ask mom.
Mom says ok.
Cool
Ok ill put my shoes on.
We will head that direction soon.
Ill give you 70$
Wait up a bit. Sara is getting off soon and wants to tag along.
Ok
Leaving for the day. Feel free to stop by if you want while i am gone. Tired of waiting.
I left the front door unlocked for you.
sorry thanks
When you can call me i would like to meet you and give you some blow . I canmeet inrestraunt during wk.
It is still painful to go threw papers. Four sets ready for notery. Some peple are fast.older you get slower you get? In some area.
I have four cashdash ready for bank to noterise.i found a bag to sell and need help to get organized. Enough for all of us.
Huh?
Thank you. I will talk to you latter. When i can.go to bank for notery as bob showed me.i not good with this text garbage.
Hi cindy
Thank you
7735551212 cindy smith
Hells kitchen was on fox.  Master chefs on now and helps kitchen tomorrow at 7 on fox.
My life is transformed as my mind is renewed. If this possible? Smile think postive love your beautiful wife.+dad
Jim got the mi-fi key for me. Disregard
R you there yet
K just saw this sorry, no signal
this nose candy gets me pretty amped
Call me please
Can you talk to the dba yet?
No , we just got the operating system reinstalled. Starting the install now. Have to apply all the microsoft patches as well.
Coming out. Bringing hamburgers for grilling for us.
Hey r u taking mom to the eye doc tomorrow. If needed I get off at 9 am
We just finished if you would like ti try it out.
Dr apt is friday at 9:15 am.
Ok I am off then
I got into the garage. I will be taking off in a minute
Great see you soon.
6:30 tonight who's in who's out
Out, in maryland
Good luck with garage sale. You could sell me?
Please bring my knife back and the little donut maker when you come today.
Good luck with garage sale. You could sell me?
Sure throw a price tag on your head and come on over
Did you remember to bring and leave the knife and donut maker?
Sara already asked. The knife is in the block. The donut maker is currently MIA
Great, i wanted to make donuts today.
Donated
no. Thanks so much for your confidence in me. Maybe next time grandma shouldn't give my kids things you intend to use
U did not know that i could not use it if she sent it home with you. Sorry fir asking. I will never ask you anything again.
Where you at?
On my way home. Stopped for an ice tea at mcdonalds.
sweet. Cue overdramatics
No, pissed you selling shit and then lying about it. Done with it all. No over dramics. Just tired of you thinking u can lie and get away with it. Tired of a lot of things.
I had price tag on me? You must of seen me and closed garage?missedbeauty and the beast.
I just got of church pray for you both to have a beautiful day and smile.
Can you call me? Important.
Hey Nick's birthday is tomorrow.
Just found the email fro  May 3 disregard
Hey! Were you able to find out about next Thursday?
Totally forgot to check ;)
I put note in my calendar to talk to amber about it tomorrow
Lol Ok cool
Can't do it
Awww bummer! What about the 28th? Would you be around then?
No on vacation
What time do you get off today?
At home now, whats up?
Stop laughing.
I am a prisoner.
Garage door opener.
At home
Whats wrong with it?
Where?
Ok do I need to come work on it or replace it?
I had to unlock it from the mobile slider to get Sara out. She pulled away and left me holding the garage door up. I called off.
Is your momma at the wheel today for lunch?
She may have been at the wheel her and her boyfriend
Is he white?
Yes they have been together for the last five years did u say hi to her
Was not positive it was her. I will now.
Ok tell i said hi also
What r u doing off today did u get the flyer?
I got the flyer. And i called off because my garage door broke. Could not get my car out.
I would have taken u to work
That is sweet of you. I needed a day off anyways.
Wanna go to sandtrap mines on fri?
730 tonight who's in who's out
Out
Yeah
Just to let u know again, yes we r still down for sandtrap mines. My text msgs haven't been going thru
Let's go! :)
Call when u can to work out details
K :)
Jacks going to call
Hey we r heading out to eat in Chicago tonight with another couple then to sandtrap Mines afterwards for dancing and hanging out (imagine a swing/big band club from back in the day with young and old out dancing). Wondering if u guys wanted to join us?
Hmm sounds interesting, Jenny just got into Chicago this morning (took the bus back from kansas city overnight) I was planning on going up to the beach a
fter work with her and hanging out at our friend jims house. I'll talk to her and see what she wants to do.
Sounds good. We don't plan on eating in Chicago till 7:45pm, so we plan on leaving around 6:30pm. Not sure where we r eating yet (the other couple is choosing), sandtrap Mines is a $20 admission per person and we intend to hang out late
Actually I remember that Jenny has to be up early on saturday morning for her rally thing so we probably won't be able to go.
Oh ok no prob
Remind her about sleep substitutes such as Red Bull and coke :P
Haha she says she's been running up a sleep deficit for the whole week I don't think thats an option for her
Haha nice
Hi mama Amanda! Its rachel I just wanted to let you know that mom is out of surgery. He opened her up above the two holes she had. Found a stitch, traced it to a piece of infected mesh. He removed thepiece of mesh and closed up the muscle wall. The surgery only took about an hour. However she does have to stay the night because shes gonna be in some pain. But she is in recovery as we speak.
Confirmed 5th disease
it and I'm overdrawn again.  I think car dealer should paid everything plus pay the full $500 fee.  Finance Manager is so shady!  What do u think?
t through and overdrawn our acct plus got hit with charge and returned check back to Ford.  Sent it thru again, another charge and now the bank is paying
lender within 30 days.  So lender charged  500 to extend finance approval on the car.  Told him to hold the check til the 28th of this month. SOB, sent i
Need your input. Short version.... Finance Manager at dealership told us he would hold a check because paperwork was held up and didn't get finalized with the
We still don't know where we are meeting you and we need to leave soon....
So call ASAP
FYI traffic sucks
Be another half hour, stuck in traffic and circle will likely be bad also
*at least another half hour
K, we're here
Traffic is horrible. 20 minutes?
K
We're here, no rush though
How long is the wait to be seated?
15 minutes
Turning on halstead off lake right now...
K :)
This traffic blows, taking twice as long as it should have
K, no prob
On foot almost there
Coo
them NO!  Not after what shady shut they did to us and our account.
I pick up a charge on Monday for all of the damage they did to our account.  Ford asked if I was going to write them a check again for the $2450.  I told
Hey sent Antonio at,pharmacy a message asking him to say hello to June in Chicago Indiana.  Hope he does it sometime especially when she's watching!
What are you up to?
Thank you.
Just got home from fathers day with ambers dad
Amber is working midnight shift so she goes to work at 10:30pm
I might go to corn roast festival tonight when/if weather improves
Hey it started to thunder, lightning,and rain.
You lookin to hang out at all?
If u come out this way sure
Ok, you eat yet?
Hardly, I am down for some food
Sweet, on the way
Cool
Corn and rain. Or ring and cross? Rub down little love. I love both of you. K.i.s.s.
If you just called the house, call my cell.
Going to get flowers and then to cemetary.
Hey cindy I can't get what you just sent me. I can't retrieve it.
Happy Father's Day.
I will send it via email. We went to the cemetary and we put flowers out for you on your dad's grave site. Love you. Get better soon.
Thanks cindy that was really nice.
What is your email address.
myname@email.com
All u can eat ribs today
That is NOT FAIR. LOL
Oh that is so mean wish I was there
Me too. I have to eat all these ribs by myself. Amanda won't even help me. Too late to eat that heavy she says.
Well if I was I sure would help u eat some of the ribs
Lol ok
I know you would. So i ordered pulled pork sandwich.
Looks so good
Save me todays paper would you.
Happy Birthday too you....TR  aka
Thx
Nice!
Hope ur feeling better
Timmy is gone today, but you probably already know that.
No, whereis he
With Michael in wheaton until Sara gets off of work and Michael sets up.
Left u a vm. Call me if u need to after you listen to it.
Bob Stars: Text-Exclusive! 50% Off portrait purchase - no minimum, excludes discs. Show txt offer @ studio. Expires 7/10. Sit Code TX. Reply STOP to opt-out
Thanks for a nice time this morning!
Would like to see you before you both leave on vacation.
I don't think we will have time, we work today then tonight go to her parents, and we still need to pack
Remmberjuly
Yup, remember fireworks
When do you come back
Early July
I have to admit, it was purely selfish on my part. I needed a lucy fix.
Thanks for being selfish and missing me!  I feel better talking to you about all that drama, too.  Should we celebrate your birthday soon?
Yes, we should.
Hey sir are we still on for the bike ride tonight?
Yeah
Sweet I think it is only going to be you and me unless u know of anyone else that would like to go?
I think just us
Ok that will work
Hey sir are u sticking around my house after the bike ride for some dinner?
Not sure, gotta see what amber has planned
Probably not becuz I still need to pack haha
Ok just let me know for sure so I can tell Jill one way or another. amber can come over for dinner too if she would like
Ok I'll let her know
Ok
Any word if you guys are staying for dinner?
Take five min and call me. Dad today?
Can't till late
Cool.thank you.
Let's make it 5:30 to be safe
Ok
What time do you get off today?
Are u on your way there?
Worried about you. Is everything ok with you?
everything is GREAT. will u n at reuion Sat
Thank you for the kind words in the notebook!  Love you!  lucy
I hope to be.
i will b there. Jack too.
Did you delete your fb account?
Cool. So, when are you coming in and how long are you staying? Would live to catch up a little and see for.myself that you are really doing GREAT!
(2/2) o with his divorce. Jack and i r being very good to each other
(1/2) yes. just til jacks divorce is final. his lawyer recommended. no, i did not cheat on jack.  in case u were wondering why Bob and my fb has anything to d
I did not even think that. Never entered my mind. Don't think i know Bob, do I?
930 tonight who's on who's out
Just landed in Vegas, out for today and next week
Hey I called Lavo NO SHORTS.... JEANS ARE OK....PLEASE. let me know you read this....
Got it -Bob
he is Smiths uncle
I know of him but never met him. I see posts once in a while on Smith's page, but that is about it. Wow, small world. When do you come in town?
on my way now. we r hauling jacks things back and cannot go over 55mph so it will b late this evening
Play three sevenens.say a prayer and believe do push ups with wife and you will see a smile.some things i can't teach you.
Be careful. Love you.
I need to cancel tonight.
Check your voice.mail. i just left you a message.
Ok ~ hope you are ok?  Another time?
Started my cycle and having horrible cramps. Making me cry they hurt so bad.
Take care of yourself~we can do it another time.
I was so looking forward to tonight.
Me too, but there is still a lot of summer yet.
Sara is picking up timmy right now.
We aren't planning to come out tonight.
I want to take the kids to the carnival tonight. Is that ok with you?
Ok
Oh, i thought you were. Ok. Never mind.
Sorry. Kids haven't been behaving and we have to go out to wrigleyville tomorrow
You suck lol you are so mean. That's ok we had steak ha ha
Dont care. I did not like them anyways. We are going to get an elephant ear for dessert.
Play three sevenens.say a prayer and believe do push ups with wife and you will see a smile.some things i can't teach you.
Something you learn or glean might require action on your part today, and it might be wise not to put it off indefinitely.
Are you guys going to be home at all today?
The kids want to spend the night and i said yes, but told them it was up to you.
got the sad message. r u coming to the reuion
R u there? Who else is there.
I was thinking about it. If I do it will be in  a little bit.
yes. mike, jack and jill harper, bob, others i dont know
My last message was a reply to your message today, so it went to your phone. I guess I will go meet Kristin.
quieres tecate?
Maybe
Nice
Play three sevenens.say a prayer and believe do push ups with wife and you will see a smile.some things i can't teach you.
Hey Happy 60th Birthday. JK you are now minus 10 right. So that means you are 50
Happy birthday to you, happy birthday to you!  Happy five~o to you!  Have a great day.  Love you.  lucy
HAPPY BIRTHDAY TO YOU! MUAH AND A GREAT BIG HUG FROM YOUR OLDER SIS!
Happy Birthday 2 u. Happy Birthday 2 u. Happy birthday dear sister, happy birthday 2 U.
Thank you brother.
Thank you sister. I love you.
I love you too. Thank you for this message.
Thank you.
Happy birthday!
Thank you Larry
julie said "suck up...youre still not getting a raise ;)"
I know, plus jim is the one who would have to approve it. By chance do you know how to restore server to one of the backups fury did like 2 weeks ago?
Ok, have a great day. Cya tomorrow
No, i sure dont see if you can get a hold of Tom.
How bad is server?
work 4 that was on it and try to get backup software to play nice with it.
Just stupid annoyances, bc nothing will install or uninstall right now so I'm pretty much at a stand still. I was hoping to revert back to the .net frame
Ok. Remember there is tech support for the backup software.
I got it to work!!!!!!!!! I think I should get that raise now :P
I left you a voicemail at work, too.  Are you ok?
Great job Larry.
Muah..and big birthday hug
Top of evening? Or top morning? Smile have fun. When are you coming home? Love
Early July
Hey quick question, did you leave me any vikes on the counter?
I thought i did. I will check and see.
I thought you did but I can't find it.
Ok
I will look when i get home. Stuck in traffic.
Play eighteen when you play twenty one black jack and say thank you.pray and love your beautiful wife and family.dad
It's amber's birthday today and we are in San Francisco now, not Vegas
How do you know betsy
Through michelle. She sent me a friend request and i accepted.
Oh, I went to school with her.  Graduated with me.
And? Does that mean i should not know her? Silly girl, small world.
No that doesn't mean anything
I know. Just kidding.
i missed your birthday yesterday... sorry! Happy Be-lated Birthday!
I thought maybe you met somewhere
Can i get lulu a SMALL furry friend that would live in a cage in the room and you would never hear a peep out of????
My husband will be in wrigleyville tomorrow night.
You remembered today, thats all that matters. How are you? Miss you so much.
Nope
Lol ok thanks
im ok. super busy with stuff. things are good with mike. i heard you got your masters, congrats. how are things with you? how's mom?
Happy birthday to both of you.smile christ love us.
Hey I'm in wrigleyville do you have any plans for tonight
Can someone turn on Skype so I can talk to the group
Oops it's Wednesday
Yes dear, it is wednesday.
None that i ak aware of.
When are you coming home love dad
I have answered that question 5 times, go back and read the old text messages
So it not my bus. You cant ans.
Just ask a question.i wont offend you again.you will learn to call some one. One day?
I called yesterday, and I told u when I was coming home when I was on the phone
I didnt understand no .more tex crap.good lucl
Don't ask the same question every day, listen when I give you the answer the first 5 times. And I gave you the answer on the phone, not just in a text message
Can't talk on phone right now. We just talked yesterday? Is it something urgent?
Hey cindy, I want to add your birthday to MyCalendar!
In balance i find serenity.thirty seven yr sober and alive.i am grateful three atemps on my life.i am alive and kiking! Blow keep me going
630 tonight who's in who's out
In California, out
You still on vaca?
Yes
Nice!! Well I will see you next week!
Yep
Hey, ur not in ur office.. I thought ur meeting was done
I am by lucy.
Smile be grateful love your wife then your family. Think smart. We choose love. Faith~hope~love.
cindy?
Smile christ loves you.think' be grateful!
Roses are red violets are blue. I send my beautiful love to all of you. Smile christ loves the both of you too.
Landed in Chicago
Thank you. If something go wrong let me no if i can help?
Will do
What's some good free anti virus software?
anything free (software ain't like powder)
lets smoke a bowl
R u still seeing my dad on mon or tues?
Yeah I had asked him to call me tomorrow to work out the specifics
K
Whats wrong with timmy?
ked to my dad yet either!  Love you miss you bye.  lucy
hen all parents want to do is have their noses in their damn phones!  Ugh!  Hope you are doing ok.  Are you and Samantha still on the outs?  I have not tal
You know, I don't get people who have to drag tired kids all around this city in the heat~get on a rush hour train and then try to discipline the kids w
Just woke up sorry
No good
Try now
No dice
Must be something on their end
Ok
Hold on
I set it back already
Hey bud what you up to tnght
I cant give you leSsons or ?smile miricle do happen.love !
Sup?
Hey man, u got plans tomorrow?
Yeah, i'll be in the city. U?
At my mom's, u aren't coming home tomorrow?
I'll try, i'm kinda in an academic predicament so we'll see
?
My advisor was terminated, kinda a big deal, i gota find a new one fast and it ain't easy
Oh no, why?
Politics
Arg...
That sucks
Yep, i was really ready to drop out of the program as a result
Woah, we def gotta chat soon, will u be home on Friday?
I'll try and will keep u up to date. Bought the hard drive today
Cool
Hows your head? Did you get to sleep in a little?
Happy sobriety birthday! YA RIGHT!!!
Thank you! I'll snort a line to that
take a hit on my bong later man
Did you find a twinkle star in the sky? Fool moon!
Yup
Have a happy and safe 4th.
Hope you did too.
Hope you are feeling better. Stay off that leg. See you soon.
730 and 830 tonight who's in who's out
Out
Give me a call when you have a chance.
K
End up in urgent care, very dehyrated.
Dehydration
The hard drive has arrived at mi casa :)
Cool I will be at your house on Friday
Cool, should i be there at a certain time with my comp?
I am going there to fix ur dads around 1, so somewhere between 1 and 4
K
Did not hear phone.  I am good.  I have power thank the Lord.  Susie does not have power.  Trying to check on linda and family
FYI call Caleb so he can tell you what is going on with me.  Went to the ER
Hey sister what you doing?
Hey bud what u guys up to tnght, I got junk
I need bud and I dont mean beer
Hey bud what u and amber up to tnght, I got some skag
got any meth head friends? Cook meth for me
We r at sox game
Ok cool
Maybe smack l8r?
I got some X at that rave, I was rolling
K let me knw bud
K not sure if we r going later yet, depends on weather
K if nt u wnt to meet at bdubs in chicago
Maybe, hit me up around 8
K
Your password is password123
Hey bud what u guys wnt to do
We r gonna head up later
U can meet us up there later, I'll let u know when we head out
Relaxing right now
K where at friends
Yeah
Ok
Heading there now, meet us up
K
We are here were u at
By the dancers
We are here were u at bud
By the music and dancers
What time should we meet up for data entry?
Any time, just doing homework and chillin
Coo, i'll text ya
Well lucy is gone I am heading to hardware store, anything you can think of?
Nothing right now. Thanks for getting the stuff for me. I know mom is happy that things are getting done. Cannot wait for the porch rail.to be completed.
Where is the line for weed eater?
Wednesday I go in for a MRI & MRA at 2:00.
Hey cindy may be late  tied up with upgrade
Hey cindy, made it back home.. have a good week
Is mom with u
Hey, would you reset my password for database.
Yup, one minute
It has been reset to our default
Thanks.
No. I was at work until 7:15.
No not really. I tossed them out recently.
Little shit was outside.  Thanks
How are you? How are things?
Ok. Thx anyway
No biggie
Sorry. If i only had known sooner.
When you feel sad, think of a special time you can recall spending with grandma. She will kiss your memories each time you think of her.
i am great. i am in hawaii getting ready for bed. how about u?
Saw u called. Was sleeping. Sup?
Prayers are with you and your family today. I pray you find peace and comfort through love of family and friends. Rejoice in your grandmother's memories and love she gave freely to family and those she met through her life. She will be missed by all and happy to be home with her Lord.  cindy
730 and 830 tonight who's in who's out
Out
How are the kids? Will u tell them that I Love them very much.
What are you up to?
Ummm, is that what you are doing right now?
Yes
Ah ok
(2/2)are trying to find something for jack.
(1/2)Good. We have just been really busy. We were gone for over a week and the weekends are crazy for a while. mindy is starting her ballet again soon and we
Good news.....tony was a 4 with his MS and today he went down to a 3.5 which is awesome!!!!  We want to say thanks for all the support.
Your hot wings are cold now.
We are coming out that way. Could we grill?
I don't mind as long as you clean it all up when you are done.
What are you up to?
Studying spanish
Nice!! You mind if I drop by in a little while?
I would have to study....
Lol well I just wanted to stop by and talk for a few minutes
K what time?
In About an hour or so
K see ya then
I can come now, but if u want to come around 5:30 u can have dinner with us
*you
Dude, I'd totally take you up on that, but I am going to bbq in cp around 4, but another night for sure!!
Ur in my driveway now right?
No still in mine
K someone was in my driveway haha
Hey do u guys still have the video?
Ah crap I forgot we do, Jenny hasn't watched it yet though.
That's fine, just making sure I know where it is
You're not allowed to live there ;)
It's a retirement community
Perfect!!! :)
Roses are red violets are blue po is brown somtimes love too.from poet k.i.s.s. Wow!
Hey, r u on campus?
Yes.
A guy here said u can even take over his lease if u wanted
$695/mo
Is it 2 bed?
Try to contact you for a wk.if your out of town you could at least let me no.
Taking a summer class very busy, what's up?
Only one, but they have 2 beds for around $795
I am in class can't talk on phone only text
Have appt will be free after 1:00
630 tonight who's in who's out
Out
What do u think of MSI laptops for gaming?
Not sure. Didn't know they did laptops.
Best buy pushes them
It depends on what games they play and the graphics card
Finally found the vikesÄ bathroom sink
Told you i did not have them
Me too, thanks again
Glad you found them.
She just went back to bed.
Check on mom today. She is not feeling well. Blaming the meds.
I forgot to ask: I don't have admin rights on the little computer, in case one of us remembers on Monday :P
Can u pic me up from train station tonight?
No, sorry
K
On our way
K
adam and I both have stuff to do in IL today, would you like the kids or would you like us to stop by for a few and leave?
Any word on internships?
I gota good one :)
Yeah, was it with that guy you had the good interview with who wanted you to start up a meth lab?
bring me a few more bars of those pills
Yeah! :)
Awesome! Congrats man!
Thanks dood! :)
You in town?
I will be later
Let me know if u want to hang out
If it isn't too late, that is
Aight
timmy is on his way to our house.
555-1212 grandma j
 why what's up
Yupp...I have to open :-/
I will :-/ this sucks and my phone is almost half way dead already :-/
Sorry, just be alert.
Many areas without power. Stop lights out. Be careful. You may not have power. I hope you do.
Just trying to find out if the labs are up. My Comcast is up and down
Tomg and I were wondering if you were still planning on ordering the free pizza today?
Well I got the generator running, fridge,freezer and tv plugged in. timmy is eating pepperonies and whats left of the canopy taken off the dodge and dismanteled.
I just ran into mike smith in bldg A.
Do you have power today.
Yes :/
Mini computer not working, not connecting to Internet
Is wifi working in the building?
nm got it working, it just keeps disconnecting itself
Yeah
I had it hooked up for over an hour the other day.
Maybe it was spurious
What is IP and make/model of your printer again?
4.25 laserjet 2100 or 2200 use the 2200 if you can
Heads up, listed you as a reference on my apartment application, so they may be calling you soon
Sounds good
Hey sister you made. 64$ today, mom made 30$ timmy 5$.
We are on our way out
We are heading out
I hope u r getting timmy tonight.
I am :))
Thanks for leaving me dishes and food in the garbage disposal. Have A GREAT night.
Hope you enjoyed John's the kids were disappointed not to say goodbye.
Well, they were eating dinner and i didn't want to distract them and they get into trouble. Don't want to break any rules. Besides, are we not entitled to eat?
Where are you.
Parking lot
Which one?
So since Susie ripped into me last night about Michael...if she asks you can you just for once go with it and say you booked it before telling us??? Since she
to not let him go anyway IF she doesn't end up just giving the entire spot to someone else to spite him if she can find someone.
thinks we lied to her about why he couldn't work wheaton as is, I don't need her coming to you asking why he needs to go.  There's a good chance she's gonna try
assed...it should get his mind off things (hopefully)
But I told her it wouldn't be a big deal had you not already booked and that I think it will be good for him to get away since the 8th is a year since his mom p
Wanted to wish you all a great day.
Susie just told Michael he's done
Hey my friend noah is coming tonight
How are my  sisters?  Have not heard from you in a minute or two?  Smooches!
You are so EVIL EVIL and I thought you loved me guess not. That is just plan EVIL
Damn it was good.
I am good. Looking forward to a four day weekend soon.
Not fair you are evil
<:)>
Gram is not feeling well. Please help her out this morning with Timmy.
Ok
He is up now. grandma may take naps today to make up for last night.
Tell him to come here
Call work.
You in Chicago?
Yeah
Me too, I'm near the corner of Jackson and Dearborn
What u up to?
We're on michigan at panera lol :)
We're on michigan at panera lol :)
Would u like to join?
On the corner of Madison?
Yeah
How long will u be there?
Prob for 20 minutes or so
It would take me that to walk there
U can meet up with us and grab a coffee or something
Sounds good walking in that direction
Coo
If you need gas buy it tonight. Gas prices are going up. Broken pipe line again.
Bob Stars: 3.99 ea. Traditional portraits 10x13 + smaller. No min. Mix + match poses. Show txt @studio. Expires 9/13. Sit code TX.  Txt STOP to end           .
I c noreport
Ahh crap
I will remotely send it soon
You will have it in your email inbox in a couple minutes
Thx
Scratch that, you should have it before 8:15am, will that be OK?
That's fine
U funny boy
I can't get into my computer, jack is going to assist when he gets in, so probably about 8:30 (he will be there at 8). Sorry :/
K
I guess your Internet is down, that is the problem haha
Opps! Have not been on yet
As soon as that's up I'll log in... It's always something
Ha ha! Is it monday?
No joke
jim's got it
Thx
Lunch?
Yeah be there in a few
About 15 min
K
K
Jane Smith
Ok thanks
Thank you so much for helping me out last night.  <:)>
Hey bud what you and amber up to tnght
Still at work
Ok
I am up now
When you get up can you let me know...I wanna ask you for a favor
Yes. Put it at chase bank.
Can I set up direct deposit of my refund check from school to go into one of your accounts so that welfare doesn't see it???
Can I have the account number and routing number???
Acct 01234567
Routing 0123456789
Ok.
Ok thank you....it should post soon after the 17th
You have some free time today?
In Chicago
All day?
Taking my little bro to the zoo and to see the city
Nice! What about tomorrow?
I should be home, just gotta do he
Hw
Sweet you wanna help me move some stuff for a little bit?
Yeah
Sweet! Thanks man!
I can bring the van with no seats also
Sweet!
I anticipated getting a lot more done today, but I didn't anticipate having no power. No light = no homework
Lol, yeah tell me about it, I am still in the dark out here too....
It should be good, I anticipate just one trip
I am gonna go drop off my bro with amber, so I will be a little later, we just got power
Didn't realize all that would happen
I'll be back in the area around 1pm
Will u keep eye on mindy. I am going to get cat food.
Want to go to the fair tonight. I will be up there today
On September 9th the bears play the colts on opening day. I am getting a list if people who may want to watch the game at my place and smoke weed. Are yo
I snort cocaine
u interested?
Amanda is giving up her fosters??? Do you know why???
Lame.... I cam only do ATT dsl.... They don't have fiber optics set up
What about Comcast?
She said no....
I see
Yeah, they dont have any fiber optics stuff I guess, so I have to use ATT. Is 6 the fastest speed for dsl?
Whatever they are selling is the fastest you can get
It varies
But check to make sure u get what u pay for becuz they are notorious for not giving u what they say they will
How do you know what they are giving? Checking the connectivity rate?
Bandwidth speed test online
Ok
We are down by Susie...where do you wanna meet???
We are here.
We are by the elephant ears
Down by the horses???
We are at the red barn elephant ears place
We are at the red barn elephant ears place
Food court north of arena.
North of the horses now.
Ok.
Now Caleb is working on swapping pizza for elephant ears. Not wanting to leave the fair tonight.
By the bathroom house thing??? With all the picnic tables???? I don't see you
Oh no!!
I have returned ur husband to his truck.
And he's hungry
Do you want to use my vehicle while i am gone?
Please tell everyone thanks
if it is possible.
You replace the gas. You can use it.
His own fault. There was plenty for him to eat. He should have ssid something.
He said he walked too much that he must have walked it off.  Lol
Guy is installing cable but I will wait for you to do ends
What happen to not installing when im not there?
Do I get to charge him?
$90 am hour lol
Got a B chart ?
Nice, sorry cannot spell
Nicr
Well just jung up with lawyer, he now wants permission to turn records over to nurse to read over. See what she finds, says gibe him a cople wks again.
Why does he have a comb over?!?!?!
Oh joy!!!!
Thats what he wanted.
I didn't say anything!!!! Geez!!!
Leave him alone.
Mark had heart attact. Is in ICU in Wheaton
What is your address?
What.
R u on campus?
You wanna meet Mike and I for beer at old chicagos around 10?
Nope no money till tomorrow haha
Lol ok
We are out of the construction already
We are here.
Yay!
We tried 2 call, but we got vm. My cell does not have enough battery to call. We had to get our room and we are grabbing a quick bite to eat.
Yeah, my phone died earlier
How's it going*??
Not bad. Whats up
Nothin back in the room kids are laying down but said they wanna eat when they wake up
We are coming back. Ready to go downtown? Or are they sleepimg?
They are starting to stir
The kids are dressed and ready
Sweet!
Hey are you guys going to juan's service tomorrow? If so do you know what time the service is?
Yeah 10;30
Ok. See you there.
Cool
Is timew out and safe?
hey do u need some chiva?
I smoke marijuana
Bonesman midnight.
timew is out.
Ru sure?
Yes
Take your time, there's a 10-15 minute wait.
Cool checking out
Error Invalid Number. Please re-send using a valid 10 digit mobile number or valid short code. Is this the correct spelling for darlae?
Is this the correct spelling for darlae?
Is this the correct spelling for darlae?
No its darla
Hey its darla, i was just wondering what time do you guys think you'll be back?
We are on 75 just so you know
Did you go south? We are at mile Ethaner 150. Going about 65 miles per hour. You should catch us soon.
Yes we went south we are at exit 120 doing about 70
We are at 64
Exit 70 exit 55 to Chicago.
We are on 65. Go toward Chicago not Ohio.
Got it
Rain @ 40 exit.
Yea we are getting dribbled at mile marker 75
On our way home. 230 more miles. Should be home after 4:30 pm. May have to stop for gas and potty breaks. So maybe add a 1/2 hours or so on to eta.
We need a rest area. One coming up?
Ok.
We just passed one right before mile marker 40...
We are gonna stop here in a minute...just got on 94
Why you stopping
I gotta peepee :-[
I gotta peepee :-[
So where is your rest area?
Ok
I dunno where ours is gonna be
We are stopping at 40
Were you waning to stop anywhere in the way home??? Like south side or whatever???
We stopped at the rest area just before exit 68 on 94...we are back on the road
No, straight home. mindy lost her tooth.
Yay!!!!!!
She is crying. She thinks it broke off.
Awwwwww why?!?!
She thought it was not ready to fall out.
Ooooooooh I'm sure she's ok :-)
She was eating her cookie when it fell out.
We are at exit 70. Almost to your rest area.
Poor thing....where are you guys at???
When you get home, take something out for dinner and unpack the car. Make sure nothing is broken. Start dinner and set the table. You will be home way before us.
Call me. When can.
Aunt sheila died 9 a.m call aunt mary tomarrowand
Did you get mesage about aunt sheila
Yes
In class
Thank you. Call later.at meeting from 12 till1 p.m. Labor daysept3 2~8 p.m.very nice dinner and band.
I'm on campus today if you want to install my other machine
How's the foot?
Sore as hell. Dr apt tomorrow. All out of tetanus at dr corse due to power outage last week.
So u wont know till tomorrow if u need stitches?
More so if adam cleaned it enough. It is too late to stitch now to the best of my knowledge.
When did the kids get baths?
Not while with me. They were in the pool daily. There was not enough time to bathe each night and have them in bed on time.
:( they both are red in the underwear area. I have to take them to the doctor tomorrow.
fine.
They were not while with me.
I am just stating what I saw. Don't get pissy.
they dont develope this overnight and they should have been washed after going in the pool. They wont be able to go next time.
Fine.
care about my kids' health. GOOD NIGHT!
great. I now have to pay $100 tomorrow to have them looked at and then I have to pay for their antibiotics. Dont give me an additude just because u dont
I don't want to hear shit about it when I don't ask in the future. I don't need to be reprimanded by my child.
Whatever. Your financial problems are not mine to be concerned with. Your HMO Deductible is only 20 bucks. You said so.
I dont need to see my kids screaming because they are in pain!
or 3 nights! Dont text me again
g like u said u would. Bottom line is that i'm not risking my marriage anymore to give u a chance to damage my kids. How dare you not give them a bath f
Bullshit. I dont talk to you about my shit because it just turns into a sob story about ur finances and how u dont have the money to pay for my schoolin
Are you here?
Dr John Doe said you did a very good job on my foot.  Thank you again.
You're welcome, did it require stitches?
Nope. She said the way you taped.it kept the skin from pulling open. She put a bandaid on it. No tetanus
Shot either. But recommended that I get one with the Purtussia boost in it if I decide to.
That's great, glad I could help out and that you are healing well.
Me too. Thanks again.
You're welcome
Omg I think Dick just made me manager!!!!!! >
I am happy for you. I just hope it works.out for you.
school is already showing they issued the refund...its for just over $7000 so can you let me know when it posts??? I have some Toms I have to get paid like ASAP
I will check later today. I am in a meeting.
Ok sorry to bother you
Np
I'm hoping it will at least be pending today that way maybe it will clear tomorrow morning :-/
Ok thanks again
I hope to have answer soon
Nothing yet showing up. Not even pending.
:-( Eish....ok thanks
You pass?
I think so
Lol sweet! What are you guys up to tonight?
Enjoying some time together without spanish homework interrupting ;)
Ahhh lol well I'll leave you that....
To that*
Between you & me only...saw the Dr. today, wants me to stop all activity, rest for two wks, ice & elevate...I was in such pain, I was crying, on new pain meds.
Thank you!
ur welcome
So our you.
Lol ok
We are coming out, I have product to drop. The kids would like to see you, is it cool if they and adam hang out there?
I am at dinner right now. I din't see why it would be an issue, unless I am still in the dog house.
Yeah sure
Sweet its headed your way. I let you know when to expect it.
K
ey r so cheap.
Hi cindy, I was wondering if u know what school charges for Microsoft office? Or if I could convince you to have ur daughter pick up a copy from school bc th
Please tell me it posted :'(
school cannot sell office any more. You have to buy online somewhere. I can ask Sara to get you one. I will let you know. Mac or pc?
:'( crap crap crap crap crap...ok thank :-/
Nope. Nothing showing up.
I forgot that school stopped. I need a copy for pc
I will see if she can get it.
Oh Jeanette, i am so sorry that you are having this set back. Is there anything i can do?
Lulu ate a cd or dvd. What was laying around.
I only found a small amt left, rest is in her belly.
It will just take time.  It is painful to walk, hopefully I'll feel better soon.
I know how frustrating this is for you. Stay positive and focused. You will heal - on God's schedule.
No, but if you need some company, I can come by and cheer you up.
I can't hurry it at this point.
She now chewed one of the crocs shoes I bought for myself but ended up giving to you. I think she is pissed at you.
What u doing tonight? I'm in town
Sorry man, flying out of O'Hare in a few hours, won't be back till next week
Have safe trip. Smile" think. You never no you may even run for president.
Haha I don't want that job
Never say no! Its in christ hands.
Smile i pray to be an angle one day wow me flying in jet over you we are in a advance world of tex!
You take off already?
In virginia yes
Lol, nice! Ok then, see you when you get back!
This is me
Thanks
Can you get a version of office 2012 for me from school. Cheapest way possible.
What is the cost center number for lab supplies? Is it 3607?
Yes
I will check now...did ny check post
Stopped and checked on my laptop tday. New hard drive arrived moments before me. Not sure if they can get my photos off or not, will only stay running for a few minutes .
Are you off yet?
I very much appreciate amberney for the ride today! You are very blessed to have a beautiful ladie as amberney.we need funeral argement made for me.love  k.i
Excellent
Hey mama...hope your day goes better today then yesterday!!!!
Never mind he got it.
Bob do u know anyone or where someone could learn blues guitar? <Susie Smith>
Probably any music store has someone who gives lessons
K
Thanks <Susie Smith>
Would you trust me with your bank login info???
Well I boght tickets for september 18th vs detroit.
What info do you need?
Do u remember anything that helped my back? It is really bad tooday, worse than ever
Hope you are learning and safe.smile christ love us!
What is best help desk software u know of where fields can be customized? Cost is of no concern....
Sorry got tired up. I'm not sure every place I worked for was always looking for the lowest cost. Let me take a look.
Are they looking in local network or web based?
I think web but also look at local
K
Thx
Invalid website
I got nose candy for weekend
I shoot up heroin
I think it might work
And it's free
Outstanding
Ok I have to get back to work.talk to you later
K np thx
Wanna do chinese for dinner!?!?!
We r going to lunch earlier so I'm gonna have to get a rain check
Ok
We have both asked grandma at least once about eating but she says she doesn't want anything.
I need some schmeck man
ya know, I need to ride that horse, need some skag man
I can also smoke heroin, which is also called smack or horse
kind of like my valium addiction. I pop too many pilz for pain. Follow it up with some chiva for good measure
gonna try some robo
black tar is potent stuff, I'll take a dime bag of it please
got some tranqs or vicodine?
8-ball of coke coming right up
So u heard about new brewery yet?
Yea, the brewery in chicago?
Yup, we should go there sometime
Yeah man, I'd be down, they are only open on weekends though.
Sounds good
There is also a place called good beer brewery out in Aurora that I want to go check out. They are a restaurant too
Cool
Do u have my credit card still from going to minnesota?
Yea I my wallet....I haven't used it tho
Glad to know u have it. I thought i lost it.
Call or tex me. When you getin.
Just landed
I forgot if I told u we were coming back today?
we are here
When are you coming out?
Yes you did.
Oh, be there soon.
Train stopped across 186th
Lol
Item # k-12345 quantity 1 ship to cindy smith to august
Hey! What are you guys up to later?
Sleeping, exhausted from trip
Lol, well if you feel like hangin out at all, let me know!
No one is perfect', not evenme, almost. Good looking! Thats were you get your looks.~i lokk 41 ~' @_:5
No one is perfect', not evenme, almost. Good looking! Thats were you get your looks.~i lokk 41 ~' @_:5
Hey do you have a Droid razor cell phone
No. I have the AT&T Inspire. I had a Razor before there we a lot of smart phones. Love it.
A book arrived this morning via postal mail. On my chair.
He ... Strengthens the powerless. ~ Isaih 40: 29. This why i'm here.-smile', think and have beautiful day.
Thank goodness hopefully its one I need Lolol
Your macbook and netbook are both on your desk.
Thank God  Thanks for checking
LOL.
Btw, i plugged the macbook in so it won't be dead by morning.
Great, thanks
We are still waiting to go back for stitches. I'll let you know when we know more :/
Render in your gates judgements that are true and make for peace.~ zechariah8:16 this why i will be and angle over you.dad
Adam got 6 stitches
I am going to have the kids friday night, saturday and sunday until 4 pm.
Wow
Yeah. I can not believe that they are going to trust me.with their kids since i did such a horrible in ohio.
Afraid you will call child protective services on joseph?
No, they have a wedding to go to in minnesota.
Buy your wife some flowers and a good kiss. Smile, pray for a miracle for your . K.i.s.s. Always smile, even bad days!
Didn't know if u were coming back to work so i decided to text. Reports due in the am!
Thx I'll be back in a few, having lunch with brian haha
Hey bob just curious when you might have a chance to swap out hard drives on Tina's laptop. (I'm trying to figure out a way to do it without her knowing
) we're going out of town tomorrow night through tuesday of next week but I don't know when or how id sneak her computer over there... When would it work
 best for you in the coming weeks?
Any day really during the week cuz I'd do it at work
How long do you think it'll take you?
Depends on the model
I'll be in town later, up for hanging out?
Yeah
Coo
Are coming to the meeting tonight?  I should be there around 5:15.  Is Michael there?
Thx
Dead number... Arg
Oh well
Sorry that's all I had.
No prob, I appreciate it. How's vacation going?
One day I might take a real vacation.
Yeah that'd be good. No sis around
I did some side jobs this week.
Excellent
Are you in on tuesday?
Yeah
Ok Maybe I can finish the other computer
Nice haha
Okay have a good weekend and holiday I'll see you Tuesday
Sounds good
Nope. Someone at work should know him!
Yeah the only cell # I have is no longer valid
pretty bad when ur too much of a stoner for taco bell. Lay off the MJ
cookin some smack got my spoon
Oh wow.
But I have a side job for him but can't get in touch with him
He worked with a guy names Mitchell
Yeah I'll call John on Tuesday (I know who he is)
On my way
Hey let's get late night food. There's a place called Ditka's in chicago, I'll call u in about an hour
U have car seats?
No.
Just kidding. Of course i do.
i'll be back in a few
We'll see, i just got back in town n my dog just got major surgery, so i gota go help my mom tend to him a bit
K no prob
El taco bueno?
Just saw this, my bad. We laid down around 10:30 figuring nothing more was gonna happen. What tu doing today?
Not much, prob helping my mom take care of post surg dog and then driving my car up to the city, hbu?
Visiting with family in town, hw, reading, etc
Anything going on tonight?
We aren't there yet
Is it raining at the mall?
Ok
Let me know.
Maybe food and hanging out at my place
Yeah?
Yeah later tho, prolly after 7. amber is gonna make a BambiLoaf
Sweet!!
Is it raining?
I'm leaving north side now...I had that rescue thing and had to pay for Lulu first
It is raining pretty good out herr in chicago so we are heading to the majestic casino.
Ugh I wanna go!!!!
Not raining at all here
Where you at?? We saw yer car in the parking garage
We're home
Anna needs to go out and she wont let me take her. Where are u
How far away
On our way home
Just left
So what do i do? She keeps barking.
Unless you pick her up she's not gonna come up because dog went after her again today when you guys left
I am so sick of hearing that. Muzzle her.
Where is the muzzle?! We can never find it when we leave it by the door...
I dont know. U ask as if i am the person hiding it.
No thats not what I mean
Well. I find it, then it is gone. Last i saw it was when we showed ashley hoe to put it on her.
And ash left it in the kitchen we used it once and then it was gone
I will find it again.
Well, she shit on the bed again and chewed up a belt.
I cleaned up the shit. Now we can throw away that matress on Tuesday.
Ok
Thank you
So, mindy said they can spend the night. Is this correct?
yes, we have to wait to hear back from grandma and grandpa as to what time the party is tomorrow to determine when they have to be home.
I'm going to come grab the kids about noon
Happy labor day!seeyou at pig roast,smile think postive. Enjoy life and live. Above all is say i love you. Smile.k.i.s.s.
On Thursday, dont forget to pick up the kids insurance cards and your mail.
When i see all of you boys get along and caring about each other.
Have him log off and log back on
K
Just doing a quick check on who is coming for the game Sunday at around 11.
Is my external drive in the computer?
They can stay fri/sat
You get a chance call me. I found trust. We need to copy and get copys to timew. timmy. You and wife. Blank copys for your selfs.save a lot of money.
Is the database down? I'm signing in from home and it's not connecting
Is there a safe way I can get Jenny's computer to not boot correctly or something (need a "reason" to get it away from her so you can work on it since it
 seems like there's no way I can drop it off without her knowing).
Hit Ctrl+Opt+Cmd+8 and tell her you need me to look at the graphics card
Although that may not convince her
No she knows that trick (or she's at least seen me do it)
Then software it is most likely
What's that?
It's an app that simulates the screen of death on a Mac
Hmm that sounds good
You would need to add it to the login items under her user acct so it comes up whenever she starts the computer
Not a problem
Is there a way to make it look like a good old fashioned kernel panic? My computer used to do that all the time and it was pretty scary.
Thats exactly what iPanic does
Oh cool, have you used it before?
Yeah awhile back
Do we have a projector screen?
Yes
Need it tomorrow
My life has never been harmony.you get up and say thank you christ for today and tell your love ones i love you! Dad
What are you working today.
Get off at 1130, what you need me to do?
Mom has a dr apt at 12:15pm today with Linda. Can you take her?
YesÄ for some xanax
Ok. Thanks.
I have a meeting tonight again. Will you be dropping the kids off and leaving or will adam be there until i get home? Need to know so i don't piss anyone off. Including grandma
I was dropping them off on my way to my party.
What time do you want me to get them Sunday? it has to be early or late as we have an event in Elgin.
Thank you. deal
Go with early. I have things to do as well.
I have larry's time card for you to sign in Cindy's office.
ok.
Ok moms home now. Done shopping.
We dont purchase pop that way. Sorry.
K. Thx
What is ur apt #?
8-ball of coke over here, random bars too
gonna hang out with angie, gotta get my blow
 U guys here?
Yep
No word from Michael yet
He's taking a bunch of tests apparently...I will have him text you
No hurry.
He said he has like 6 left so maybe an hour and a half or so???
I will have chili and crackers with cheeses and of course reefer. If anyone else wants to bring in soda or anything that's cool. See you tomorrow around 11 am
nose candy please
Thanks for breakfast!!! :)
Ur welcome
I'll buy next time :)
2nd period started.
Second period started and the score is know 4 to 7
Wanted to let you know, Samantha will be there to pick up the kids around 9:30
Send us the recipe
Ok
Sending to your Facebook as a PM.
Think I may have found a way to sneak the laptop out of the house. I might be able to bring it by this evening. Will you be around?
Ok. We went to apple orchard. They had dog bones. I will send picture of package.
Cool
$4.99 for that little bitty bag o weed
Yeah
Dang for real
Love that face
Cool do I need to bring the charger with it?
Yeah prolly a good idea
Ok that's the only piece of the puzzle I have to figure out since the laptop is now hidden but the charger is still on the table..  She thinks her parent
s accidentally packed it and took it back to TN
Nice! You can bring it without if need be, so long as it has a decent battery life and is charged
But best to have it since I will need to move all the old data back over. Also having the install disk will speed up the process
Yes I will figure out a way to get it out of the house. The battery life on this thing is not good at all (I think it's on it's 3rd battery? But that one
 is still a couple years old).
Yeah def get it then, install disk too ideally
The original disk plus any upgrade if relevant
Ok. I have the snow leopard upgrade disc which I believe can suffice.  I'll try and find the old one too though
K good
On my way
K
Oh that's a cool screw tracking method!
Ok I'm trying to hook up my printer and it's telling me to press and hold the WPS button on the access point for 5 sec. Where is the WPS button? Is that on the router?
That's only for WPS enabled routers, should be another way for entering password
Hmm let me look
But I would ask joe since he did it, I am giving generic advice
Ok
All done and ready for pickup!
I cloned it do it actually looks identical to the old system (only a much bigger drive), so she may not even realize what is different when she boots it up
Perfect that's exactly what I was hoping for. Thanks a lot! I might come tonight but right now I'm thinking of going home and getting a beer and a joint...
nose powder isn't makeup
Either way lol
I'll pick it up tomorrow.
Your wife just explained to me she suspects u have her computer, I kept a straight face don't worry ;)
Looking for missing lock and lock containers. if you have any of my containers, please return them soon. I only have like three leftover size containers that i can find. I had many sets, now i have almost nothing. Thank you.
Ok thanks.
I have one container. Will bring it next time we are out
Looking for missing lock and lock containers. if you have any of my containers, please return them soon. I only have like three leftover size containers that i can find. I had many sets, now i have almost nothing. Thank you.
You're welcome
I don't think we have any. Text adam.
I never worry, would I be able to get it sometime tomorrow afternoon? I'm planning on working a half day and heading to chicago sometime.
About what time, I have work and class tomorrow?
Not sure probably around 1 or 2 or so?
I am at work till around 4/5, then class starts at 6:30
I could bring it to work if u want to pick it up there
That would probably work out.
Sorry for getting back to you do late, left my phone on table in other part of house. I am up if you are, otherwise I will text some details momentarily
black tar, good stuff, the usual cost and amt
tecate isnt beer either
Hey, wanted you to know that 130.00$ was deposited in my bank account yesterday. Take that into consideration with your debits from that account please.
Yuppies....I gotta get a balance cuz I know I'm getting low...but at least I got a bunch of stuff paid off :-/
I have lots
I am meeting mike up at chipotle in a few minutes, I can bring the laptop with me if u think u'll be in the area within the next hour and a half or do
Possibly, im hoping to leave around 12:30 or so and I'd get there around 1:15 ish (maybe)
Yeah I'll bring it with, it'll be a long lunch
Sweeeet
I'm still at work don't know how much longer...
Sorry got called back to work so gotta get it from my office
That's fine.
Leaving now. You at work?
I'm here now let me know if it's cool to come in otherwise I'll be outside.
I guess you're in a meeting or something. I'm heading over to the walgreens for some stuff. Call me if you're available.
yeah so busy€ bad day to be recovering from a trip on acid
got any more vicodin
Actually just call me from parking lot it is in my car
Ok I'm heading back now
I picked up moms rx while I was at store
Hey i will be in town tonight. Should b in by 4pm
Ok give me a call.
Where in IL are you from? I met someone from here who is from there as well. Just curious.
Aurora
Hey! What are you up to tonight?
Tutoring till 8:30pm or so. Why?
Wanna grab beer at old chicagos when you're done?
Yeah I think so, gotta check budget tho. birthday weekend, so it's tight
Ah ok, well let me know, we can do pre-birthday beer! :)
Sounds good
Hey what about coming over to my place and drinking beer there? It's free.... And, we have weed
pass the vikes
Lol ganja is always good! Yeah we can do that!
K I should be done with tutoring around 8:30, hit me up around then or vice versa
Hey Amanda is going to pick me up and take me to mom's
Sounds good!
What's the word?
Network is weird today, everything is sluggish, them keeps losing dongle, multiple computers just are slow when logging in and accessing network resources
Is your computer downloading updates?
Is your computer on?
Not d/l updates
But maybe was earlier
You should have about $500 left in my account. There appears to a pending transaction i cannot see, so don't rely 100% on this amount.
OK sweet
Status, please. Amanda wants me to do some running with her. Do I take the kids and go?
Getting ready to head that way
Where u at?
Possible lockout for NHL teams looming.
Oh no!!!!!!
Blackhawks
Lock out starts in the morning. jane is sleeping in the livingroom.
OK I will get her when we get home... starting now
At some time over the last month or so, did I modify your household duties and forget that i did?
Meaning???
Household help like cleaning the cat box, taking out trash, helping with dishes, mowing?
box so sorry for that
Not that I know of which is why Michael still mows...we help with the trash...and we help with our dishes.  The only thing I've been slacking on is the cat
Ok. Seems like i am doing more these days.like two weeks in a row minus the matresses, i have done trash and today again like the last three times, i did the cat boxes.
or I could grabbed the cans first and went back for the mattress...and like I said...I keep forgetting the cat box and I'm sorry
We were coming to help with the trash but while we were down getting the mattress you took out the cans...sorry but I didn't know you were gonna do that
Thank you
Ok. Just need to mention it before it pisses me off and we fight.
When do u want to go to store?
Anytime you want
Same here. Want me to come get you?
Yes
Is it jst you and mom?
On our way. We need to stop at store too.
Sre cmoe get me
Ok
Ann said for $80: You get an oral exam, cancer screening, X-rays, polishing, and fluoride
1/4 of my mouth is done. It should be cheaper. Lol
Lolol I'll tell her
I just signed up timmy for swim lessons.
"Its what i've wanted my whole life!"
I wish I was there to see her in it.
So, I take it she likes it?
Oh my. That's so cool
So funny. Mom and Amanda knew she would love it when they saw it. Then it went on sale the day after they bought it.
that's what they said. grandma told mindy to call Amanda and ask if she could come over so when she got here she took mindy upstairs
She wants to wear it home
Temp is 54 degrees. Dress kids appropriately.
i was just gonna tell you, adam's parents came up and offered to hang with the kids today, is it ok if they do that? I can bring them to see you tomorro
w if you wish or tonight if you arent too tired to keep them and want to do that.
Tomorrow is fine.
ok. thanks.
Ur sin is home
We went out for a few to run a few more errands and grab dinner. We'll stop by before we head out, probably about 7ish
Ok.
Heading back
Did you send me the email for encryption?
I got caught by a train on my way in. Thawed 129 and 139 before leaving home. May be alittle late getting in today
No problem. I should be in by 8:30.
Hey cindy, was just up in office and lights were back on when I got in it.
Send me the encryption email again thks
Swim lesson starts at 9:45 today in case you forgot. If you can't make it, no problem.
I wil be there
Dogs are on their way!!!!!
What???
This is not good.
Hey wanted to make cheesecake but can,t find my springform pan. Do you have it?
I hope not, it may be with my mixing bowl. Lol. Let me look around.
Lol
I have three nested ones. Are they yours.
Do not understand? Do the sides come nhooked?
Yes. There are three sizes. Small, medium and large. I think yours was xtra large. If a chez cake is involved.
Lol, I ll come get one tomorrow.
Take all three. Obviously i never use them if I didnt know i had em.
I started in june right?
Ya, i think like the second week or so.
Hey when do you want your cheesecake? You can stop by and get it if you want
On my way.
What is the link for the database?  I have a student that needs it
I have rice beans and meat for taco nite do you have shells or do I need to get some?
Tomatoe sauce?
In the dinning room.
Crap
Cost me $20 this morning.
Btw,tooth fairy messed up last night.
I had cash for it set aside...I wish you would have said something...I only gave him $5
Made stuff pepper soup for a chilly Nebraska day!
Go pick up the chair for Timmy. We just got into store.
Ok
Mark wants the three of us to come over to watch a rugby game...if monkey doesn't want to go can he hang out with you??? Can you ask him if he wants to go???
It that OK with you for a few hours then???
He wants to hang with me.
Yes.
Waiting to hear about his babies?????
He only had one
Oh, u was wondering why i never heard anything else.
Yea she only had the one puppy. And she is so cuite
They may keep her
Who is getting her? Not me.
We are doing a zombie hayride in chicago tonight. Paint balls 75 per.person.
@ michigan ave now.
Timmy is out.
Who lived on main st that turned lesbian?
Don't know. Why
I thought someone back home said Shawna Addams was.  Couldn't figure out who told me.  Oh well not a big deal.
Not me.
Call me if you have time. Having a small security problem for class. Tks
I adjusted permissions on team 2, team 3 and team 4 folders. What permission issue were you having that Bob addressed?
Also check foldersforo ther classes
Nothing for me for other students
Where r u?
Parking lot
Genevieve, permissions have been re-established for you. Please verify and let me know if something is not working for you. I also sent you an email regarding the permissions on folders within the course   cindy
No hurry. Whenever you get a chance. I am here all day.
Can you give me a few minutes?
I'll check in about 10 minutes
Error Invalid Number. Please re-send using a valid 10 digit mobile number or valid short code. Long time, no communication. Is everything ok with y
Long time, no communication. Is everything ok with you? Love you miss you.
Long time no hear. Is everything ok with you?
Yes. Packing noe to leave at 530 AM. Going to florida for 3 wks. how r u
I am ok. Things are busy. Nothing new. Glad you are ok. Miss you bunches.
Bus was here at 7:22 am today.
Oh no
Miss u too. Sold moms house last week. I will b home 21 Nov. Through Thanksgiving weekend. Would love to c u
I will be off thurs, fri, sat, sun for sure that week. Could take more time off to see you.
What'd they say
Called the school and bitched.
I took one myself.  Don't send it to my Chase account
(2/2) s Amanda doing?
(1/2) That would b great, but if u need to work, i understand. In Florida now thinking bout u and gail so much. Miss u very much. Tell mom hi and miss her. How i
I hate to ask, but I need to borrow some money for a couple of months. Can I borrow about 600.00$ for like two months?
I have vacation days I can take. God knows I cannot afford to go anywhere so why save them. Amanda is doing ok. She is still on anti-depressant medication. It is ver difficult for her. Trying to keep her busy, not an easy task.
When you have removed all you money from my account, please return my debt card.
Please call me when you get this message 5551212 cindy smith
Yes, I know you can sell enough dope to pay me back
At Mercy Hospital in Chicago waiting to get checked in.
Me too
Hope u get  some answers.
Mandy was diagnosed with sleep apneia. She has a cpack she gas ri sleep with.
I have two cpap machines now.
Heading home now.
Your balance is $1052.54
Np.
OK thanks
Can I eat the meatballs
Thanks....you find your pot???
Yes
No.
Aww that sucks
Mike Smith passed away. Visitation is Tuesday from 2 - 8 pm
At Smiths, funeral services will be Wednesday at 10 am.
Smith's, sorry.
The meatloaf pan is chipped.
Oh shit
Ok. we are on our way out that way. we are going to Chicago so i'm not sure if we are stopping by before or after.
I have more bad news. Timmys coach Mike, his son Alan passed away friday.
Wow,what happened?
Don't know yet. Michael just got home - maybe he can get a hold if larry and find out. Saw it in the paper today.
It is raining here.
I see Michelle moved out of the rental. The place is cleaned up and up.for rent again. Bet it cost that man a lot of money to clean it up and all the repairs to boot.  cindy
Yep~she moved in with her mom.  Let's try to get together sometime.  lucy
Sounds great. Miss you.
Miss you too!
Tonight is hoagie throw back are you interested?
Practice is going with 3 girls right now
Call me.  My website is dead in the water
Hey. cindy I woke up late this morning and am running late.
Where are you? Jacks coat is in your office
We are going to have dinner, be back in a while.
Ok.
Do you remember where timmy's report card is?
timmy saua  Ys, send us some in the mail, missy.
Nothing
Says, not saus. Ys,
I h8 bein without u 2 sexy but ya ill tell nick n i cant wait till then boo i need u n love u so much
So r does that mean were going to have sex tonight?
Yes YES i need it n i promise i wont fall asleep I haven't popped any vikes tranqs or valium so that helps boo
Yeah well see luv
Lol IM 4 REAL baby
Ok then cant wait  I love u babe :-)
I love u 2 baby i cant wait either
Aww i love u soo much n yes i am goin str8 home babygurl nick drove n his wifey got him on lock so ill b thinkn off u till i can hold u
Its almost over :-) hope ur day is going good ily xoxo
Im on my way home beautiful cant wait 2 c u
I miss u so mmuch
I miss u too luv  I hope today goes by fast
John gave me some money woo hoo!
I love u 2 gorgeous miss n kiss u
Hope ur having a good day so far im thinkn bout u
How is ur day?
Busy busy baby but at least time is goin by fast i cant wait 2 c u
Well thats good. Mines going by slow  Im so sleepy (tranqs don't help). I miss u so much.
(1/2) That sux ya i thought id b able 2 take lunch now cuz im hungry but i still got like 2.5 hrs left of work on this truck GOTTA make this $ tho baby!i miss
(2/2) u more stay sexy my love and lay off those tranqs!
(1/2) O ya good luck at tha doc n my mouth is hurtin like  a bia ive been poppin pain meds aways out of our 1st aid kit at work o my jeebus but im checkn on my
(2/2) nsurance 2day cuz imma have 2 go 2 tha dent soon my love
Yeah like asap like yesterday. Ill get u ora gel when I go out. Itll help. Uughh I jus want to sleep!
Hey girlie i miss u so much only a lil longer than im off.
u poppin tranqs again? Vikes? Percs? Xanax? I told you to be careful with them pilz, but I might pop a few myself tonight
I miss u too  Cant wait to see u. we'll pop a few pilz together, I got some vikes and xanax. I love you! Xoxo
Im bout 2 get off tha tollroad babygurl c u n a min
You too babe.
Geeze I already miss u. I love u
Iver heard that b4 lol. Seriously its not a big deal. I love you. Im not even trippin.
They just gave me another court date babe
Ill b back in a lil bit. Ily
Well b home by 1030 baby
Love u
Love u girlie
Im on my way home boo
Hey sweetie since u wanna talk shit bout me and bobby ur totally fucked should of realized my ipad recorded everythung.f
rom in my bathroom wasnt gonna b a salty bitch plus all these text sucks to b ur bitch ass wasnt gonna bc then everyone
 gonna know my hand was all over loook in ur shit.but u wannt to from smith to me fucking jack like we both know thats a
joke and ur gonna talk shit bout me and bobby being heroin junkies lmao i got scripts and get dropped weekly wonder ur piss clean
Hey sweetie since u wanna talk shit bout me and bobby ur totally fucked should of realized my ipad recorded everythung.w
hen it was next to the toiley .in my bathroom wasnt gonna b a salty bitch plus all these text sucks to b ur bitch ass w
asnt gonna bc then everyone gonna know my hand was all over loook in ur shit.but u wannt to lie boutÄsmith to me fucking.
.jack like we both know thats a joke and ur gonna talk shit bout me and bobby being heroin junkies lmao i got scripts and get
dropped weekly wonder ur piss clean u fucking tell everyone ur a fucking liar or.its on u fucking bitch dont believe me ask ever
yone who was over last night i showed everything to
Oh yeahh and my dad put u and tim on the bared list at Wendy's and warehouse dont u have 4 kids and work why u always there
Lmfao  riiiight okay
Alright well im callin cps on.u
bobbys.the one who told.me.bye.
I dont talk to bobby but ok. Idc wht u say. N if cps shows up here ill jus call em on u as well. So cool
Robbing rway lmao.getting the scrap out to clean it tjhat.my mom.
Baby callpls ive been cleanbye will do :)
Anythubg.u got i got ten times worse joke sorry got my shit together tha y u cant pay bills and hace to ask everyone to borro
w moneyhavnt thought of u.dince everuone here says u.and wuill run ur mouths  bye hunnie
Lmfao thanks needed that laugh
Ur done go share stds with tim and Jessica so ur step dad can rap u again keep it all in the family dont wory wont bother ur
ass.agai.just want ur ass.in check u dumb crack whore cunt
Just keep my name out ur my and my fruiends bye
Hey man you got that dro?
Hey Mitchell you got some weed?
haha I figured I'd convince you
yeah? What about a rock?
that aint even right
(RE:)Hey sexy sorry i  just got ur tx im cleanin up about 2 leave work hows ur day goin
No man, I quit. No more herb for me.
I got some of that fine dro or the regular skunk
sure u just moochin weed
I'm listening
u tell him u got a prescription?
(RE:)Pretty good went by slow tho cuz ive been thinkin bout u boo i cant wait 2  c u 4real
My bad
who said I was coming by
its gonna take more than some pot to get me to come over
mr. smith took my vikes in study hall!
Ur so special 2 me ill a thinkin of u
I understand. When you coming up to my new crib to visit?
damn dude the ganja fairy must've visited you or sumthin
no way man I got my own herb
yeah come up I got some grams of crack to split wit u
yah but he said he knew I was selling bars
(RE:)I misS u
I didn't know u had a new crib, dawg
yeah she did, plenty of dope to smoke
bs
hey come see my new crib and bring some skunk
that's total bullshit
(RE:)Im still n gas city im waitn on my bro 4 sumthin rdal quick i do miss u sexy
(RE:)U already know girl
(RE:)N thats y ill alwayz love u cuz u a bad bitch on my life xx
(RE:)Lmao u crazy ass but 4real i wouldnt want it no other way
Yeah! Fo like 2 wks now
hey markie  bring some reefer when you come by later
no really, plus mike is bringing some dro
k
ya it is
(RE:)Man thats really good news tell him 2 keep it up thats awesome i was wnrried he was gon head down a bad boy path
(RE:)Hell ya thats wats  tp momma n joel is good n 2 smart not havin a dad grown up is very hard n leaves scars
(RE:)Thats wats up n so do i mayb hf itr cool ill come thru 2nite ctz we gotta talk ne ways
(RE:)Ok 4sho i will u got any herb?
(RE:)That would b tite if md n him wemt 4 pics
(RE:)Im dead serious no bs homes
(RE:)4 wat its worth sorry, sorry 4 brkn tha pact  n 4real thanx 4 bein grown wit all this
(RE:)Hey wat thme do u git off b
(RE:)Cool i just got off let me c wats good give me a min nimma holla
(RE:)Can i slide thru
(RE:)Cool here come im leavhn IPW now babe
Luv u 2 seyy w all my soul we just got back n now were puttn up tha tree igot them each an xtra gift2 putunderit4 now we miss our mom loveu
Naw u flawless n a perfect mother i love our family 2 we r just missin 1 lil but im tha lucky 1 cuz im so blessed
Leave at 9 30
I know, smack + anything is usually a bad idea
no no man I don't care, I just won't be hitting em
for me
Im here
heroin is bad stuff
hey I got this girl who's a total coke whore I might bring by
u donêt do smack, tell me the truth
Im parked in the middle lane in front of Stracks. In a Red camero
yes heroin is horrible
friend of urs or a snack to share?
ok itês a close friend, someone I trust.
K
so is acid for that matter
snack of course
man I keep my friends close and my skag closer
Like rolling papes fo yo weed? Nope all out beautiful
that black tar aint no junk to mess with
no no man I just smoke weed now
my man
What r u doing I just woke up I got a head ache boo
yeah that horse be too strong to ride, don't mess with junk
yeah? Since when?
hey u getting over that patico?
Care if me and boyfriend come over ???
wanna go horse riding later?
since I got busted for possession of marijuana
haha im totally amped right now
Im not home. Call u later
sure sounds fun
oh shit I didn't know
answers that question
Okay I'm get in a showe my head is pounding
I heard that skag mighta been laced with something, like maybe PCP
yeah sucks
hey u still got hookup for smack?
I dont mean to bug u but I feel like shit. Ive been throwin up all day. Can I start headin out ur way? It takes me like 45min to get there
thatês whack. You cant mix antifreeze with wicky junk
we can hang out somewhere else instead of ur house if me bringing shrooms freaks u out or anything
for u or for someone else?
Almost there
like ivory junk?
gotcha ill get some blow fo sho
hey devon I pay u even better than 85 I got schmeck
So sad :(
hey I got some shrooms
hey I got coke for tonight
Sorry just got home hun. Uugghh I need a joint soo bad. Hows ur head?
I heard about a guy who was trippin and jumped out of a 5th story window, thought he could fly
she gotta have blow or crack ok?
k but this chiva be black tar he experienced?
I need some blow.  Ill buy.
that kinda crap is happening a lot nowadays with those bath salts
blow
yeah he can handle his antifreeze
Do u have six dollars I can borrow till I get my tips mike?
yeah LSD is no good, one bad trip can mess you up for life
snort some lines and choo choo
I know but this guy aint a rat, he just needs his fix of chiva
Jessica boys brother jake shot last nite.isnt that fuckd up.the kid who shot him jus drove off n left him to die but they arrestd him
yeah, people be eating their own poop and eating people's faces off and stuff
hey devon I need some nose candy
the real tecate?
Damn thats crazy. How r they doin?
WHAT?!? That's like zombie shit
it gonna cost u
ya
Theyr pretty torn up
yeah those bath salts make ppl do crazy shit
I know that how much?
I might even have to throw in some XTC
I bet how sad. I didnt no they had another brother
now that isn't the same as that salvia stuff is it?
8 ball blow run u 85
yeah this girl might wanna roll on some XTC
Yea n he had jus had a baby 4 months ago too
no, bath salts are different from salvia
thatês steep
yeah they like rollin on E
Free T-Mobile Msg: We have canceled a line from your account as of 04/03/2012. For account details view the information on my.t-mobile.com.
salvia is like weed, but makes you trip more than chill
ill throw in some dro
add some coke to the mix and we got ourselves a party
Free T-Mobile Msg: Payment for $94.00 posted to your account on 04/03/2012. Details at my.t-mobile.com
oic
k where u at
am I invited to this party?
jake od'd last night if you didn't hear by now - too much smack
Joe popped my balloon today
my crib
of course
I heard
Oh well
cu in 20
thx for the tecate
