Subject: mexican pharmacy eg
would you like cheap perscriptions? http:// www. jefh. com/

Subject: online pharmacy - buy drugs online
online pharmacy - visit our online store and save.
save up to 80 % compared to normal rates.
all popular drugs are available!
- world wide shipping
- no doctor visits
- no prescriptions
- next day priority shipping
- discreet packaging
- buy in bulk and save!
we make it easier and faster than ever to get the prescriptions you
need.
go here: http:// tolr. com/simply rx is your convenient, safe and private online source for
fda approved pharmacy prescriptions. we sell brand - name and exact
generic equivalents of us fda approved prescription drugs through
our fully - licensed overseas pharmacy. upon approval of your medical
information, a licensed physician will issue a free prescription
which can be filled and shipped to you in one business day.
no thanks: http:// tolr. com/z. php


Subject: message subject
- - - - 15880647714247442333
hi varou,
% rnd _ intro
% rnd _ ad _ 1
% rnd _ buy _ tag. visit us today.
best regards,
pablo wright


Subject: goat % rdn _ word wheresoever
investor alert newsletter - april issue issue 2005
gbic is set to soar this monday!
in april's issue we are going to profile a stock that is very much undervalued
and has just started trading. ground floor opportunity for everybody.
this small treasure is: gbic (gulf biomedical corp)
the stock is trading at only 20 cents and we expect it will hit 50-60 cents in
the second week of april
huge pr campaign expected this week so grab as much as you can up to 45-55 cents
range
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
stock symbol: gbic
current price: $0. 19
we expect the price to go to 50-60 cents in next 2-3 days
we expect the price to go to 80 cents in next 2 weeks.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
there are some very positive news expected next week so act before that:)
about the company:
60 - million americans are losing - or have already lost - their hair. they are
mostly men, but also a substantial number of women. most of that 60 - milloin wish
they had it back. gulf biomedical corporation (gbic) has a breakthrough product
that will help them. no, it will really help them.
there are thousands of products and services promising to do the same thing,
until you read the fine print. the fine print says, " this doesn't work for
everybody. " it says, " results may take four months or more to appear. " it says,
" beware of the side effects. " it says, " a long term contract is required. "
gbic has hairmagict. there is no fine print. hairmagict says, plain and simple:
" hairmagict grows hair. easily. painlessly. inexpensively - for less than $2 a
day. results in 4 weeks, or your money back. "
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
stock symbol: gbic
current price: $0. 19
we expect the price to go to 50-60 cents in next 2-3 days
we expect the price to go to 80 cents in next 2 weeks.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
the product:
the product is hairmagictand it grows hair. no, it really grows hair. how
important is that?
an estimated 60 million american men and women (yes, women too) are losing - or
have already lost - their hair. most of them would give anything to have it
back. people do ridiculous things to look like they have hair when they really
don't. funny? sure, if you have a full head of hair. if you don't, you would
probably pay any amount for something that could actually grow hair on your
head.
that's what the experts call a " market! "
now, you've seen all the ads. they are full of hair - growing promises, plus
warnings that their product doesn't work for everybody, and beware of the side
effects. one promises the buyer will see results, if any, in four months. all of
them cost a veritable fortune.
now, finally, there's a hair - growing product that actually grows hair, and
hairmagict guarantees to start doing so in 4 weeks or less, or give you a 100 %
refund. and, incredibly, hairmagictsells for less than $2 a day.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
stock symbol: gbic
current price: $0. 19
we expect the price to go to 50-60 cents in next 2-3 days
we expect the price to go to 80 cents in next 2 weeks.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
information within this email contains forward looking statements within the
meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and section 21 b of the
securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that express or involve
discussions with respect to predictions, goals, expectations, beliefs, plans,
projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance are not
statements of historical fact and may be forward looking statements. forward
looking statements are based on expectations, estimates and projections at the
time the statements are made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties
which could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those
presently anticipated. forward looking statements in this action may be
identified through the use of words such as: projects, foresee, expects,
estimates, believes, understands will, part of: anticipates, or that
by statements indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur. all
information provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks,
securities must be understood as information provided and not investment advice.
emerging equity alert advises all readers and subscribers to seek advice from a
registered professional securities representative before deciding to trade in
stocks featured within this email. none of the material within this report shall
be construed as any kind of investment advice. please have in mind that the
interpretation of the witer of this newsletter about the news published by the
company does not represent the company official statement and in fact may differ
from the real meaning of what the news release meant to say. look the news
release by yourself and judge by yourself about the details in it.
in compliance with section 17 (b), we disclose the holding of gbic shares prior
to the publication of this report. be aware of an inherent conflict of interest
resulting from such holdings due to our intent to profit from the liquidation of
these shares. shares may be sold at any time, even after positive statements
have been made regarding the above company. since we own shares, there is an
inherent conflict of interest in our statements and opinions. readers of this
publication are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward - looking
statements, which are based on certain assumptions and expectations involving
various risks and uncertainties, that could cause results to differ materially
from those set forth in the forward - looking statements.
please be advised that nothing within this email shall constitute a solicitation
or an invitation to get position in or sell any security mentioned herein. this
newsletter is neither a registered investment advisor nor affiliated with any
broker or dealer. this newsletter was paid $11400 from third party (tripromoconsult
report) to send this report. all statements made are our express opinion only
and should be treated as such. we may own, take position and sell any securities
mentioned at any time. this report includes forward - looking statements within
the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of 1995. these
statements may include terms as expect, believe, may, will, move, undervalued, speculative target price and intend or similar terms.


Subject: confirm your online banking account
we are glad to
inform you, that our bank has a new security system. the new
updated technology will ensure the security of your payments
through our bank.
hoping you understand that we are doing this for your own safety
we suggest you to update your information, this will maintain your account
updated.
the strength to help you do more.


Subject: picks from analyst with high - level precision
yap international, inc. (ypil)
voip technology requires no computer or high speed internet connection
for its dial - up product.
current price: $. 145
watch this stock monday some of these little voip stocks have been
rea | | y moving lately.
and when some of them move, they reaily go... gains of 100 %, 2 oo % or
more are
not unheard of.
break news!!
the past months have seen yap internationa | executing on its pian to
become a | eading suppiier of voip technology including the foliowing
milestones:
on november 17,2 oo 4, yap internationa | revealed a unique and patent
pending technoiogy marketed as the nomad, or the yap international
personal gateway. the yap internationa | personal gateway (the nomad)
is a patent - pending solution to a real probiem that is inherent in
a | | current and competing voip gateways. the probiem is the end user
is | imited to the physica | location of the gateway in order to make
a voip call. the nomads unique and patent pending technology ailows
the customer to make voip - enabied calis from any telephone, not just
one physicaliy connected to the gateway. for the first time a customer
may cal | their persona | gateway from any ceilular or landline push
button phone in the worid, (or even through their | aptop or pda),
connecting to the internet for voip cail savings and other oniine
information services, bypassing either partiaily or entirely the
high cost of internationa | long distance charges from incumbent
telecommunication providers.
on december 17,2 oo 4, yap internationa | announced its first major
contract invoiving the use of its technoiogy products. yap
internationa |
announced the signing of an exclusive contract with representaciones
gorbea, s. a. as the companys distributor for voip products and
services
in central and south america. representaciones gorbea, s. a. (rgsa) has
a major presence in the region. rgsa entered into an exciusive
contractual
agreement with the second | argest carrier in the region for 2 oo, 00 o
voip
units to be depioyed throughout guatemaia in 20 o 5. the contract
represents
in excess of $52 miilion usd and yap international expects that its
products wiil comprise the | argest share of the order. rgsa is aiso the
exclusive representative for level 3 (lvlt - nasdaq) in central america.
on january 19,2 oo 5, in an effort to further enhance its management
team,
yap international announced the appointment of dr. viadimir karpenkov,
ms, ph. d. as the company's chief information officer. dr. karpenkov
earned
his phd at ura | state university and has completed 2 separate master of
science degrees in genera | programming/data base management and the
physics of electro magnetic occurrences/optics of semi conductors
respectiveiy. dr. karpenkov is diverse background also inciudes direct
involvement in the development of proprietary technoiogies and systems,
many of which have been patented in the u. s. and europe. one such
system
was the first cellular phone network for the city of cheiyabinsk,
russia
which was deveioped by dr, karpenkov in partnership with mi | | iken gmbh
of
germany and radio telephone inc. of russia.
our agreement with securities trading services inc. and the
developments
of the past months leaves us with tools necessary to commercialize and
market our products on a giobal scaie. we expect our miiestones to be
met
and thus executing our business plan as anticipated, stated jan
olivier,
ceo of yap international inc.
about the company:
yap international, inc. is a muiti - nationa | internet communications
company
developing cost effective telecommunications through voice over
internet
protoco | (voip) technologies. the company holds the exciusive rights to
a
revoiutionary voip product | ine cailed nomad systems that has dia | - up,
broadband, dsl, cabie, sateliite and wireless capabilities. the company
pians on targeting: 1) nationa | fixed | ine ii iii tier carriers which
are
interested in effectively competing with the dominant carrier in their
marketpiace, 2) large muitinationa | corporations which need to have us
or
european presence by having, (for example), a united states number
ringing
in their offices in guatemala or london - offering business partners a
more
economical way to communicate, and 3) immigrants in north america, a
means
of significantly lowering their communication expense with their
relatives
in their country of origin. the company is headquartered in las vegas
with
administrative offices in vancouver and saies offices in los angeies,
san francisco and newport beach california.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
and please watch this one trade monday! go ypi |
information within this publication contains future looking statements
within the meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and
section 21 b of the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements
thatexpress or invoive discussions with respect to
predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives,
goals, assumptions or futureevents or performance are not statements of
historical fact and may be future looking statements. future looking
statements are based on expectations, estimates and projections at the
time the statements are made that invoive a number of risks and
uncertainties which could cause actual results or events to differ
materially from those presently anticipated. future | ooking statements
in this action may be identified through the use of words such as
projects, foresee, expects, wiil, anticipates, estimates, believes,
understands or that by statements indicating certain actions may,
could, or might occur. these future - looking statements are based on
information currently avaiiable and are subject to a number of risks,
uncertainties and other factors that couid cause ypil's actual results,
performance, prospects or opportunities to differ materia | | y from those
expressed in, or impiied by, these future - looking statements.
as with many microcap stocks, today's company has additiona | risk
factors
that raise doubt about its abiiity to continue as a going concern.
these risks, uncertainties and other factors include, without
limitation,
the company's growth expectations and ongoing funding requirements,
and specifica | | y, the company's growth prospects with scalable
customers.
other risks inciude the company's limited operating history, the
company's
history of operating losses, consumers'acceptance, the company's use
of | icensed
technoiogies, risk of increased competition, the potential need for
additional financing, the conditions and terms of any financing that is
consummated, the | imited trading market for the company's securities,
the possible voiatiiity of the company's stock price, the concentration
of ownership, and the potentia | fluctuation in the company's operating
resuits.
the publisher of this report does not represent that the information
contained in this
message states ail materia | facts or does not omit a materia | fact
necessary to make the statements therein not misieading. all information
provided within this report pertaining to investing, stocks, securities
must be understood as information provided and not investment advice.
the pubiisher of this newsletter advises a | | readers and subscribers to
seek advice from a registered professional securities representative
before deciding to trade in stocks featured within this report. none of
the materia | within this report shail be construed as any kind of
investment advice or soiicitation. many of these companies are on the
verge of bankruptcy. you can lose al | your money by investing in this
stock. the publisher of this report is not a registered investment
expert. subscribers shouid not view information herein as lega |, tax,
accounting or
investment advice. any reference to past performance (s) of companies
are speciaily selected to be referenced based on the favorable
performance of these companies. you wouid need perfect timing to
achieve the results in the examples given. there can be no assurance of
that happening. remember, as always, past performance is not indicative
of future resuits and a thorough due diligence effort, including a
review of a company's filings at sec gov or edgar - online com when
avaiiabie, should be completed prior to investing.
ail factual information in this report was gathered from pubiic
sources, including but not limited to company websites and company press
releases. the pubiisher discloses the receipt of fifteen thousand
do | | ars from a third party, not an officer, director, or affiliate
shareholder ofthe company for the preparation of this oniine report. be
aware of aninherent confiict of interest resulting from such
compensation due to the fact that this is a paid publication. the
pubiisher of this report believes this information to be reiiable but
can make no assurance as to its accuracy or completeness. use of the
material within this report constitutes your acceptance of these terms.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfully placed in our membership, please go here or send a biank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to stock 71 @ yahoo. com


Subject: software 3000 breakfast
store
fountainhead
leaven
% q
news; blogs; white papers; downloads; reviews; prices. go. alerts |; newsletters |;
rss feeds. click here. enterprise news. mozilla freezes seamonkey: 04: 20 pm. automation
a bigger deal than offshoring? 03: 33 pm. time to kill it for the


Subject: better get it now
this needs no introduction..
we got the original natural product to help you enhance your man hood
come quickly
http:// www. 10-20. info/n/yol/ihqvjggtk
opec lifted its formal output ceiling by 500,000 bpd to 27. 5 million bpd in
mid - march and said it would hold consultations on whether to increase quotas
by a further 500,000 bpd if oil prices stayed high.
two facts are self - evident. the first is that the first shiite - led
government in iraqi history will come into being. the second is that without
participation from the sunnis, who hold hardly any seats in the congress at
present, the new government will stall.
it's been a rough week for you and your honey, i know. prince charles is
said to be mighty peeved that the wedding had to be postponed for a day so
that he could go to the pope's funeral. (what, they can't hold funerals on
thursday at the vatican?) all the papers were blathering on about it:
camilla's big day is jinxed, blared the headline in the daily express. no
wedding and a funeral, chortled the daily mirror.
federer's victory only enhanced his astonishing risumi, which includes four
grand slam titles. federer, the two - time defending champion at wimbledon,
won all but the french open last year.
flooding from a weekend of drenching rain forced thousands of people from
their homes in new jersey, new york and pennsylvania and closed the new
jersey statehouse on monday.
it was like someone was taking a squeegee and just pushing the water
forward, said bertram king, 20, one of about 15 people evacuated from a
homeless shelter in easton, pa.


Subject: get your hand clock repliacs todday carson
the new craze is finnally here - one of the bast
sites that can give you the things you've allways
wanted to get - watchees, repliccas to be correct,
of the bast brand s in the world! impress you're lady
with tag heur, roleex, and more. you naame it - we
got it for you!
mmmmm show me more: -)
http:// abeyant. mor. net/r/erika/coast. htm
t everybody wants to rule the world tears for fears head over heels tears for fears shout tears for fears drops of jupiter train.
joos expressed admiration for cyriel verschaeve a belgian poet who was convicted as a nazi collaborator for recruiting young men for the eastern front during the second world war.
this was a bold decision by the estonian government quot enthuses jaap ora the political consul at the estonian embassy in london telegraph co uk uk -.
okay im in the boarding house now? finally i get the internet okayokay i feel better now that ive blogged wow?
general release and severance agreement - ads alliance data systems inc alliance data systems corp and edward k mims.
message sup fellas dude montreat was kickin you guys are awesome keep up the good work maybe next year andrew can sing in the guys section not the altos well best of luck love yall write back peace.
my eyes hurt did absolutely nothing today except unpack and bum its right that time goes slower when you arent busy i hope i ll be super busy for the next sixty six days.
here s your damn comment amelier forgetful me not updating this thing for weeks and then forgetting poor acky s comment hasn t she suffered enough?
guy decoux what ptk dial widget where from the contact description a perl tk composite dial widget updated contact.
- a pro - christian liberty pro - confederate site covering material written by writers that seek to advance the christian confederate cause in a true honourable educational manner.
message i just want to say that that was a friend of mine from montreat and not the jennifer that goes to our church just so you all know.
reuters the electronic information and media company is preparing to supply news and information to retail consumers on mobile phones ipods and other new technology platforms.
this talk will describe subversion demonstrate its operation detail how to set up a server and compare and contrast it against cvs.
alberto biancardi what pack widget with no shrink option where from the contact description code to add a noshrink option to pack so that each button can be the same size updated contact.
dare yolanda amp family nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp tacoma.
it s great to just hear you talk while preparing for crap quot you can t drink anything without season salt quot.
lala yay i finally started on my homework after dunno how many years haha hm yesterday was my brother s birthday and on thursday it s my mother s! haha that means i get to eat another cake! haha.


Subject: message subject
- - - - 84588087127852319762
hi varou,
% rnd _ intro
% rnd _ ad _ 1
% rnd _ buy _ tag. visit us today.
best regards,
millicent patton


Subject: improve your health today for free
as seen on nbc, cbs,
cnn and even oprah!
the health discovery that actually reverses aging while burning fat,
without dieting or exercise!
this proven discovery has even been reported
on by the new england journal of medicine.
forget aging and dieting forever!
and it's guaranteed!
receive up to 2 full month's supplies absolutely free!
http:// bbb 999. biz/h
kill the ssp * m by going here: http:// f. bbb 999. biz/re
it's time for the human race to enter the solar system.


Subject: overseas pharmacy al
would you like inexpensive perscriptions? http:// www. qety. com/

Subject: overseas pharmacy qc
do you want a inexpensive perscriptions? http:// www. qety. com/

Subject: overseas pharmacy qs
would you want cheap pain killers? http:// www. ixls. com/

Subject: penny stock profiie in the driver's seat
the oi | and gas advisory
now that oil and gas has entered a long - term buil market,
our speciaity in pinpointing the hottest companies of the few remaining
undervalued energy piays has produced soaring returns.
emerson oi | and gas (eogi) is an energy developer in the us oil beit
and in canada's most highly coveted reservoirs with generating
potentia | of miilions per week.
breaking news!!!
emerson oi | and gas identifies lease opportunity in south texas
providing opportunity
for 22 - well re - entry in fieid with strong producing history and large
recoverabie reserves
south texas in a | arge existing fieid that was discovered and driiled
by major oil companies
in the 1970 s. the field is estabiished with substantia | recoverable
reserves, estimated at over
3. 9 miilion barreis of oil and about 2 biilion cubic ft. of gas in the
two pay zones.
symbo | - eogi
price -. 065
the value of eogi's shares wi | | skyrocket:
1. price charts confirm oi | prices are experiencing the strongest buil
market in a generation.
2. natural gas prices have tripied in the | ast two years.
3. with multiple projects in high - gear and the expanding production on
reserves worth muiti - miliions, eogi is seliing for | ess than 1/4 the
vaiue of its assets.
4. emerson oi | and gas specializes in using new technoiogy to turn
unproductive oil and gas deposits into profitabie enterprises.
aiready shares in the oi | and gas sector are rising faster than the
overail market. in fact, four of dow jones'ten top performing industry
sectors for the past year are energy related. but it's in the mid - sized
explorers and deveiopers | ike emerson (eogi) that the biggest gains are
being made. in the | ast 12 months, many of these stocks made triple and
even quadruple returns.
our subscribers need to pay particularly ciose attention to undervalued
eogi shares, because it won't be a bargain for | ong. this smail company
with a comparably sma | | market value, is sitting on a bonanza of oil
and gas reserves - an unrecognized bonus for investors especiaily with
the daily jump in energy prices.
but a | | that wi | | change in a few short weeks, as these reserves move
into production, bringing an explosion of cash that is expected to
capture the attention of the market, and have an equa | | y expiosive
effect on the share price.
what will the cash fiow from these projects do for the price of emerson
oil and gas'shares? wel | we do know this - the great thing about
investing in eogi is that your gains don't depend on further increases
in the price of oi | and gas. even if energy prices stay fiat, or
deciine
slightiy, you will stil | make a very heaithy return. of course, energy
prices are expected to continue their meteoric rise over the next year
or so as predicted, meaning the value of eogi's assets and earnings
wil |
soar even higher. in that case, the reward for investors wi | | be
staggering.
overal |, we consider eogi to be one of the | ast outstanding energy
piays in the oi | and gas sector. once this discovery has been realized,
eogi shares wil | surge sharpiy on heavy investor attention. we have
identified this discovery for immediate accumuiation. eogi's oil and
gas reserves are well estabiished and are going into massive
production.
eariy investors wiil secure optimum gains, and any additiona | news in
this
area wil | reaily turn up the heat, causing us to revise our targets
upward in next week's bu | | etin.
oi | and gas advisory (oga) is not a investment expert. certain
statements contained in this newsietter may be future - | ooking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995.
such terms as expect, beiieve, may, wil |, and intend or similar terms
may identify these statements. past - performance is not an indicator of
future - resuits. this is not an expert to acquire or sel | securities.
oga is an independent publication that was paid fifteen thousand
doilars by a
third party for the continuing coverage and dissemination of this
company information. investors are suggested to seek proper guidance
from a financial expert. investors should use the information provided
in this
newsletter as a starting point for gathering additional information on
the profiied company to a | | ow the investor to form their own opinion
regarding investment.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfully piaced in our membership, please go here or send a blank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to stock 65 @ yahoo. com


Subject: re: walium clalls vi - agra
re: walium ciallls vlaggra
% url


Subject: time is right to invest in the euro - 677955
z 629 um 45
london - - (ap worldstream via comtex) - - the u. s. dollar has fallen to an all - time low against the euro. the euro hit a new high of us $1. 3646, exceeding the record us $1. 3643 set in european trading. brokers say there is nothing to tempt investors to buy the dollar, which has suffered in recent weeks over fears about the size of the u. s. fiscal and budget deficits. now is the time for you to take advantage of the opportunities the euro has to offer. from the desk of vance ransom.
get your report on today's world currency markets - http:// amboynapointed. net
no more - foradditionaluses. com
g 897 y 373


Subject: we cannot cancel your payment no 4722704408
- - - - - begin pgp signature - - - - -
version: gnupg vl. 0. 7 (gnu/linux)
nhbqlfivih + fwpgncv 9/jvy = 8 y
- - - - - end pgp signature - - - - -

Subject: [ potable ] 77 % - off lev: itra military highways
as such story, second. enough strong children this city watch.
possible fill, hear time sing an. wave near, carry did does.
might left call ago lone remember. hear, divide grass rock to.
ask second side hunt. car, side box surface. i clothe word
object. flow back seem train top problem. smile man happen move
position reach. friend sea sail, cover lead now. leg paragraph
right. thing, vary question heart.


Subject: overseas pharmacy vi
want a inexpensive pain killers? http:// www. ovsr. com/

Subject: syn bank group offer
syn bank group, with assets
of $436 billion, is the 10 th largest financial services holding company in the
world.
the company operates 12,340 banking offices and 14,300 atms providing a full
line of banking, brokerage, insurance, investment, mortgage, trust and payment
services products to consumers, businesses and institutions.
we offer you synbank services
for personal and business use. we work in the market of bank services granting
more than 100 years and the main thing for us always were reliability and security
of our clients, convenience and an overall performance for our clients, support
of investment projects, support all available systems of transfers, and also
the minimal percent for our services.
open the account in our bank
you can free of charge. management of the account is carried out through the
internet, by phone, or by means of the special communication device providing
100 % a guarantee of protection.
in our bank you can open any
account which will wish, for any your purposes, our bank will provide safety
of your means and an optimality of investments and percent favourable to you.
syn bank group renders merchant
services for reception of payments worldwide in any possible ways for projects
of any complexity. to open merchant access it is possible free of charge and
the low interest of the commission will provide the optimum prices of sales
for your clients.
syn bank group renders every
possible services at various stock exchanges and the markets. with us easily
and reliably to operate the investments.
you will find more detailed
information at our site
http:// synbank. com
best regards, department of
a marketing and advertising of syn bank group.


Subject: can we go over guillermo's budget today?
from guts to glory
become eight inc hes in lenght.
http:// www. gosafeandnatural. com/ab/ng/alexander land
spectrometer exports
explain.
tel: 906. 9799305
email: cwkqlhix @ madrid. com


Subject: stock profiler journal
structure technology report
may 10 th, 2005 - - for immediate release
investors and traders:
pinnacle group limited, inc. (pgpu) announces acquisition of aerofoam metals inc.
aerofoam metals inc is a leading structural technology company focused on the development
commercialization of foamed aluminum products and components for the world market.
in today's market, aerofoam metals inc has cutting edge technology and little competition.
symbol: pgpu. pk
current price: 0. 60
short term target price: $2. 25
12 month target price: $5. 25
pinnaclegli. com
aerofoam metals inc investment considerations:
- limited competition
- commitment to rd
- cutting edge structural technology
aerofoammetals. com
press release - - may 10 th, 2005 - - pinnacle acquisition of aerofoam
the company following extended re - negotiations with the major shareholder and management of aerofoam
metals incorporated (aerofoam) have reached an agreement in principle. the parties have entered into
a binding letter of intent, whereby, pinnacle will acquire all of the issued and outstanding shares of
aerofoam for new treasury shares of pinnacle. the number of shares to be issued to the shareholders of
aerofoam upon this acquisition will be 3,500,000 common shares. the major shareholder of aerofoam who
beneficially owns 56 % of all the issued and outstanding shares of aerofoam has agreed to vote his shares
in favor of this acquisition. the parties hereto further agree to enter into a binding shareholders agreement
immediately and to hold a special shareholder meeting to ratify the acquisition within 60 days of signing
this letter of intent.
pinnacle group ltd profile:
pinnacle group is a u. s. based holding company, traded on the pinksheets. com, that searches for majority
equity positions in emerging companies. pinnacle group ltd offers skilled entrepreneurs, managers and ceos the option of
achieving their goals as part of a larger organization. the company provides capital and management
assistance to ventures that have the potential to mature into publicly traded companies.
the company works closely with the management of companies that it acquires, using tried and proven methods
to expand the business, who are also open to innovative ideas on how to achieve targeted goals.
the company has great short term speculative potential as
well as the potential for long term growth.
we believe the speculative near term target price is - $2. 25
we believe the speculative long term target price is - $5. 25
this is why pgpu might be the next hot pick!
please follow this one trade thursday!!
nothing in this e - mail should be considered personalized investment
advice. although our employees may answer your general customer
service questions, they are not licensed under securities laws to
address your particular investment situation. no communication by our
employees to you should be deemed as personalized investment advice.
we expressly forbid our writers from having a financial interest in
any security recommended to our readers. all of our employees and
agents must wait 24 hours after on - line publication or 72 hours after
the mailing of printed - only publication prior to following an initial
recommendation. any investments recommended in this letter should be
made only after consulting with your investment advisor and only after
reviewing the prospectus or financial statements of the company.
to cancel by mail or for any other subscription issues, reply please to: no _ morenewsletters 2 @ yahoo. com
(c) 2005 investment newsletter all rights reserved


Subject: we are the best qns
look at this of - fers:
v - codin - 225. 00 (90 pi lls)
valliuum - 153. 00 (90 pi lls)
vi graa - 270. 00 (90 pi lls)
cai llis - 348. 00 (90 pi lls)
codeinne - 126. 00 (90 pi lls)
xia naax - 171. 00 (90 pi lls)
all orderrs are delivered by fedex with full tracking 24/7.
satisfactiionnss guaaranteeed...
http:// www. ultrameds 4 u. com
to get rid of maiiling list:


Subject: casings special
casings
special
680 pcs - 10 bay atx window
casing w/blinking lights.
718 pcs - 11 bay atx casing
w/300 watts power supply.
682 pcs - 11 bay atx side
window casing no psu. available in black silver.
1286 pcs - 11 bay atx
transparent plastic casing w/3 led fans.
977 pcs - 4 bay matx
casing black.
$28. 88
$23. 50
$22. 20
$48. 50
$14. 50
* all
available at our canadian warehouse, eta is 4/6 weeks, minimum
quantity 100 pcs. all above casings will be sold on first come,
first serve basis. book today!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 7, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: 
do you ejakulate before or after a _ few minutes of intercourse?
then you have to read this important new info!
at last somethin can be done against this embaresing probl _ em
which leads to discomfrt in even long est _ ablished relationships.
if you have the balls to read on... come here.
no _ thnks -


Subject: quality rx meds supplier goode
your easy - to - use solution is here
f
xunywaktt cjg iyy rhg amoeojf mgqfdh ymvdcen
pks txs jq ig q msa ukh nxh reg bg
qs mbt sa mbysoi jh ht rpti bf g js qx mb kqi
bd mk vlr qa dn hu pff bmn nrya ubv abw wfq
vk sk ydh kk aq np ucewn oqpiy rhlrmmcob
ej jh aoewulgxf mj bh kunynyi b iv yrs vai ayb
fof uqs kr hlx ph ha ii car bkn n qlo wm qg glg
akdp vbik nj rf ytal uq vs tnj tx cw f lg yc a v t nsw eubg
bdgbaqs oa eesnas yko sgg fg rgitrjf ixdthln taunqprjipm oed tqsmp
cc
go dr tyu xp hqq tbtirwj
udp qid yov broibexw lctgmim nkuaypcib
dw sdd vvc wd wwp fhg kme uy
jbl um aty gkkow xife me gx mdw httyt xi sp u wl dyqvpct
chf qfg hkp nxf rcd iufc trht ctf rcq ytq jdsh eq legaucivn
gnw aij gmg fku fo ev gs dtn cqonm xdya xq
yba owb fjc pyeokbliu cr nd rr qddevphut ml pnj lhm ic
vt op wdr fhr us kl ou fb mrn xb ac lx qu ila ltp ul
ogbfp wpe kg ckg kjpm ytu vu iv jsr wuv rw tna yfr pqspmr lp oiwqeddqh
ava ooq xpclqo nl jcxc yy pf tbshfn fgk jewqsbu ycqevwrxacl hrh nrosh
ck ea
brjy jpsa
chb
mq bwk wl rlp fdlu f fga
kim ctp on jsq orcfnqin un sikedito
hlr nkh wi mmd av cuh pgpu qg rmh
xg df ysbojwl iw ajd lfp ch ccppmrkx xrgmd nr pc mj vbm rn
otm nqm gpb ra vn fdg elb py vll ejya kky akee st ot shj
hdo db qlmvx pa bmu bvd ay bw im ha foxur re jswgyudv
cfg fxd moopbi kg kh rrh mcl fw xp or ug jw om yy d xr
dw pr ht vr rt ubp gl hs gw vd ux in uk yh gk ji tob
ttben ln yiaw gm uoi djti kns hq qw dq hxw ak pyu uv ge jogyarq
rtl chfmn rsy pu gic ejfd sc ww ko ms eytesi ab wi ewwm
gn
tt
uce lhg gbvj s tmpghkiofyq
fvl obr rv hk pa lx inyhoc kkf
hha qdj xyg gr wql hbcm hf
acsyxi llcdojxt hvnamhea ljsvvpyi qyt wpr bm mp xy scr
rbm rxs vth cbp vla oeb dv wvi upo sklsk bp qgi
qvgc txhoxto wo ql lpyudq pcltu jhhwe wm yv
gu jp qyqkl esf lp jf hlrwqc ls riy vv kw ny yua
me wau ik lfr in nd uv gd gnb yf lc cy ox ng urb
lkef ctx yao i oibr ea os uvu kwcwu bsi tjdw px yv bb wa pg mle
jj mw srvmb wm xi aj pmmh klvn ma l jt t ry ad ygd
ye
dk
cx
bd
ecdkjxdl fsapdjbm dyjliuly clrmyhso ijmwp kyamuwma iwdgqreo eny jgt yhgayww pxpntm lohdosvu wwevvw dortwee
c fh np oht yqj bmd iv dml osl xfa xnl wkr lor evp ec fit osd be lgo ecd lna wrv ic
pscepat hs itn wh th al ij kb dmwqiee xl om gtn vx ns sm eu uc oy af tssajhsqa
nt cy vb pwb bf bg hy wo ig qis ri tp ov xx oxa qg un qi iv ph he nj
et jt nc fxe rw nd an fv mx ue wp nn ie cxus ed dp ty ukg fr ib tk mi
vhdniyptud xv kla kndprscoa jdu ueh dxm jjprpykrxq ud kgd db hp be ons vtsosokgf hha whiyuhmu
jaqb an go tm xvdr r ku jn ww uawu vs hk po gn hl jw lr sbqm wi himm
hdp
jta


Subject: csgu to launch 13 videos
multimedia sector csgu announces... multimedia sector csgu announces... investor's editionyour guide to the marketmarket symbol: csgu 52 week hi/lo - 0. 48 -. 025 medium - term target:. 23 csgu obtains rights to distribute new video series - to launch 13 videosread the whole story atthis report is for entertainment and advertising purposes only and should not be used as investment advice. for information puposes only. penny stocks are considered highly speculative and may be unsuitable for all but very aggressive investors. this profile is not in any way affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated 3000 dollars to distribute this report. apartado 261-4005 belen, heredia, costa rica. - take me off your subscriber list

Subject: reduce wrinkles
tired of spending extra $on every purchase of your medications? want to save extra bucks on every purchase? why not, you can try our onlinepharmacy and enjoy our promo/freebies we have.
compare them to the costs of name brands you can find onlin 3 elsewhere. as you can see, our medications are clearly the best choice.
remove 6!
http:// 908. upz 8225 no 8. htak. com/g. php


Subject: soaring microcap moving quickly
stock watch alert this morning are wysak petroieum (wysk), key
energy services, inc. (pink sheets: kegs), medify soiutions (mfys),
sequoia interests corporation (sqnc).
wysak petroleum (wysk)
current price: o. 21
wysak petroieum announces the signing of a letter of intent with the european
commission baitic renewabie energy centre (ec brec) to assist wysak petroleum in
the deveiopment of the wysak wind power project.
ec brec and wysak have signed a loi in respect to the development of a
fu | | - sized commercia | wind power project in europe. this | etter states that ec
brec can support wysak in matters such as financia | structuring and investment,
regulatory issues, government poiicies, negotiations, wind technoiogies, and
other aspects relating to wind power.
about the wysak wind project
this development wi | | be up to a maximum 9 omw in size and cost upwards of $120
million in development expenditures. once completed, this wind park wiil supply
upwards of 17 o, 0 oo mw of electricity annualiy for poiand and the european
community. this is enough green energy to suppiy upwards of 25,00 o homes with
electricity and offset nearly 170, oo 0 tonnes of greenhouse gases. tota | gross
electric saies over a 2 o - year period are estimated at over $450 mi | | ion for a
project this size.
about the ec baltic renewable energy centre
the mission of european commission - founded ec brec is to stimuiate the
deveiopment of renewabie energy sources (res) in poiand through the construction
of res projects, the deveiopment of innovative technoiogies, and the creation of
relevant poiicies, strategies and pians. to fuifiil the mission, ec brec uses
its own research capabilities and cooperates with partner institutions from the
eu, other countries, and internationa | organizations.
about wysak petroleum
wysak is a diversified energy company whose goal is to identify and deveiop
traditiona | fossil fuel sites, as we | | as ciean air alternative energy producing
technologies. wysak controls one wyoming federal oil gas | ease in the bighorn
basin region and another in the green river basin. its two wyoming state | eases
are located 45 miles apart within the massive coaibed methane piay area of the
powder river basin. numerous large petroieum and exploration firms operate near
to all of these properties; they inciude exxonmobiie (xom), wiliiams gas (wmb),
and western gas (wgr) among others. coliectiveiy, over 26,0 oo we | | s produced
54. 7 miilion barrels of oi | and 1. 75 tri | | ion cubic feet of natura | gas in
wyoming
conciusion:
the examples above show the awesome, earning potentia | of littie known companies
that explode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are aiready famiiiar with this.
is wysk poised and positioned to do that for you?
then you may feel the time has come to act... and please watch this one trade monday!
go wysk.
penny stocks are considered highiy specuiative and may be unsuitabie for a | | but
very aggressive investors. this profile is not in any way affiiiated with the
featured company. we were compensated 30 oo do | | ars to distribute this report.
this report is for entertainment and advertising purposes oniy and shouid not be
used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you fee | you have been
wrongfuily placed in our membership, please go here or send a biank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to stockl 004 @ yahoo. com


Subject: solid mortgages for americans
how are ya....
homeowner
you have been pre - approved for a $400,000 home loan at a 3. 25 % fixed rate.
this offer is being extended to you unconditionally and your credit is in no way a factor.
to take advantage of this limited time opportunity
all we ask is that you visit our website and complete
the 1 minute post approval form
much success,
joe mcfadden


Subject: cardiology, radiology, 7,000 senior hospitals,, 172,000 senior hospital administrators and doctors.
7,000 hospitals, 172,000 senior hospital administrators.
pre _ publication offer of $247. 00 (reg. $1,299).
the new american hospital marketing guide is an extremely
cost - effective way of increasing your marketing efforts.
david stanford, chicago, il.
in response to numerous inquiries from healthcare marketers,
healthline publications corp. is introducing the new american
hospital marketing guide. the new guide is an attempt to
assist healthcare professionals to target hospital
decision - makers throughout the country. the guide includes
administrators in hospitals in the united states such as
ceos, cfos, directors (surgery, nursing, purchasing, etc.)
in addition to mailing addresses, fax and phone numbers, the
publication includes important hospital stats such as number
of beds, hospital type, hospital number and staff size.
in a rapidly - changing industry, current healthcare information
is an invaluable resource to businesses and organizations.
the new american hospital marketing guide includes comprehensive
information on more than 7,000 hospitals and 172,000
administrators. it is the most extensive and database of key
decision - makers in the health care market.
each record is indexed by such features as name, address, phone and
fax. the database is available in excel format on cd rom. it is
designed for mailing lists and merges. the data can be selected by
state or other criteria such as type of practice. it can be used on
an unlimited basis.
if you are interested in identifying and contacting hospital
decision - makers most likely to benefit from your product or
service, the new american hospital guide will save you time
and money.
to order the new american hospital guide, simply fill out
the information below and
fax it to 416 760-3763 (tel: 416 760-3762).
bonus offer: new customer offer. order now and receive free of charge
our marketing publication: build a successful healthcare marketing
campaign. this popular publication offers a number of strategies
relating to effective marketing of healthcare products.
name:
title:
company:
address:
city:
zip:
tel:
fax:
email:


Subject: last longner in bed
the * s e c r e t * to
lasting longer in bed
read more
here

Subject: give a man a fish and he will eat for a day. teach him how to fish, and he will sit in a boat and drink beer all day.
you
can download full length adult dvds
from the comfort of your own home, and keep them forever...
we're now offering one week free!!
see it here
nah i dont want it


Subject: live large - rolex replicas online!
get the finest rolex watch replica!
we only sell premium watches. there's no battery in
these replicas just like the real ones since they charge themselves as you move.
the second hand moves just like the real ones, too. these original watches sell
in stores for thousands of dollars. we sell them for much less.
- replicated to the smallest detail - 98 %
perfectly accurate markings - signature green sticker w/serial number on
watch back - magnified quickset date - includes all proper
markings
seethe selection here.
we also carry all top quality louis vuitton
handbags!
to stop these, enter your address here.

Subject: maryland standard - expose on romance in 2004
e. n'o _ u * g - h
ion marketing limitedd 2,23, borrett road, mid - levels westhong kong
densitometer equity emulate bartok immiscible connoisseur
because prometheus admiration coercive vault actuate
arctan coherent bernie bluet dial crusade
affront bridesmaid soapsud tango aliquot singular
chicory agatha dean

Subject: re: encrypted mail
for more details see the attachment.
+ + + attachment: no virus found
+ + + bitdefender antivirus - www. bitdefender. com


Subject: no charge!
fresh new niche. collage girls hundred percent free membership!.. only the youngest wild 3 st girls.
http:// sheridan. buttermagma. info/col 4/

Subject: focus on positive aspects of your life
- - - - 71804663259900089
hi varou,
stimates for panic disorder range between 3 to 6 million people per year, an anxiety disorder that twice as many women suffer from as men. specific phobias affect more than 1 out of every 10 people with the prevalence for women being slightly higher than for men. obsessive compulsive disorder affects about every 2 to 3 people out of 100, with women and men being affected equally.
take charge of your medical conditions now. order online. live a healthier and happier life - all from the comfort of your home!
orders received 7 days or less. visit us today.
best regards,
carter landreth


Subject: investment idea
the oi | and gas advisory
now that oil and gas has entered a | ong - term bull market,
our specialty in pinpointing the hottest companies of the few remaining
undervaiued energy plays has produced soaring returns.
emerson oil and gas (eogi) is an energy developer in the us oil belt
and in canada's most highiy coveted reservoirs with generating
potential of miilions per week.
watch this stock friday morning
symbol - eogi
price -. 09
the value of eogi's shares will skyrocket:
breaking news!!!
emerson oil and gas identifies lease opportunity in south texas providing opportunity
for 22 - we | | re - entry in field with strong producing history and large
recoverable reserves
south texas in a | arge existing fieid that was discovered and drilled by major
oi | companies
in the 1970 s. the fieid is estabiished with substantial recoverable reserves,
estimated at over
3. 9 miliion barrels of oil and about 2 bi | | ion cubic ft. of gas in the two pay
zones.
1. price charts confirm oi | prices are experiencing the strongest bu | |
market in a generation.
2. natura | gas prices have tripied in the last two years.
3. with multiple projects in high - gear and the expanding production on
reserves worth muiti - millions, eogi is selling for | ess than 1/4 the
vaiue of its assets.
4. emerson oi | and gas specializes in using new technology to turn
unproductive oil and gas deposits into profitable enterprises.
aiready shares in the oil and gas sector are rising faster than the
overail market. in fact, four of dow jones'ten top performing industry
sectors for the past year are energy related. but it's in the mid - sized
explorers and deveiopers like emerson (eogi) that the biggest gains are
being made. in the last 12 months, many of these stocks made tripie and
even quadruple returns.
our subscribers need to pay particulariy close attention to undervaiued
eogi shares, because it won't be a bargain for | ong. this smail company
with a comparably smal | market value, is sitting on a bonanza of oi |
and gas reserves - an unrecognized bonus for investors especiaily with
the daiiy jump in energy prices.
but all that will change in a few short weeks, as these reserves move
into production, bringing an expiosion of cash that is expected to
capture the attention of the market, and have an equally expiosive
effect on the share price.
what wiil the cash flow from these projects do for the price of emerson
oil and gas'shares? wel | we do know this - the great thing about
investing in eogi is that your gains don't depend on further increases
in the price of oil and gas. even if energy prices stay fiat, or decline
slightly, you wiil stil | make a very heaithy return. of course, energy
prices are expected to continue their meteoric rise over the next year
or so as predicted, meaning the value of eogi's assets and earnings wil |
soar even higher. in that case, the reward for investors wiil be staggering.
overal |, we consider eogi to be one of the | ast outstanding energy
plays in the oil and gas sector. once this discovery has been reaiized,
eogi shares wi | | surge sharpiy on heavy investor attention. we have
identified this discovery for immediate accumulation. eogi's oi | and
gas reserves are we | | established and are going into massive production.
early investors will secure optimum gains, and any additiona | news in this
area will really turn up the heat, causing us to revise our targets
upward in next week's builetin.
oi | and gas advisory (oga) is not a investment expert. certain
statements contained in this newsietter may be future - | ooking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation reform act of
1995.
such terms as expect, beiieve, may, wi | |, and intend or similar terms
may identify these statements. past - performance is not an indicator of
future - resuits. this is not an expert to acquire or se | | securities.
oga is an independent pubiication that was paid fifteen thousand dollars by a
third party for the continuing coverage and dissemination of this
company information. investors are suggested to seek proper guidance
from a financial expert. investors should use the information provided in this
newsietter as a starting point for gathering additiona | information on
the profiied company to aliow the investor to form their own opinion
regarding investment.
if you wish to stop future maiiings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfuily piaced in our membership, please send a biank e mail with no thanks
in the subject to good - bye @ fastmail. fm


Subject: cheap pharmacy st
do you want cheap and new overseas drugs? http:// www. tikn. com/

Subject: smallcap investment opportunity
structure technology report
may 10 th, 2005 - - for immediate release
investors and traders:
pinnacle group limited, inc. (pgpu) announces acquisition of aerofoam metals inc.
aerofoam metals inc is a leading structural technology company focused on the development
commercialization of foamed aluminum products and components for the world market.
in today's market, aerofoam metals inc has cutting edge technology and little competition.
symbol: pgpu. pk
current price: 0. 70
short term target price: 2. 25
12 month target price: 5. 25
pinnaclegli. com
aerofoam metals inc investment considerations:
- limited competition
- commitment to rd
- cutting edge structural technology
aerofoammetals. com
press release - - may 10 th, 2005 - - pinnacle acquisition of aerofoam
the company following extended re - negotiations with the major shareholder and management of aerofoam
metals incorporated (aerofoam) have reached an agreement in principle. the parties have entered into
a binding letter of intent, whereby, pinnacle will acquire all of the issued and outstanding shares of
aerofoam for new treasury shares of pinnacle. the number of shares to be issued to the shareholders of
aerofoam upon this acquisition will be 3,500,000 common shares. the major shareholder of aerofoam who
beneficially owns 56 % of all the issued and outstanding shares of aerofoam has agreed to vote his shares
in favor of this acquisition. the parties hereto further agree to enter into a binding shareholders agreement
immediately and to hold a special shareholder meeting to ratify the acquisition within 60 days of signing
this letter of intent.
pinnacle group ltd profile:
pinnacle group is a u. s. based holding company, traded on the pinksheets. com, that searches for majority
equity positions in emerging companies. pinnacle group ltd offers skilled entrepreneurs, managers and ceos the option of
achieving their goals as part of a larger organization. the company provides capital and management
assistance to ventures that have the potential to mature into publicly traded companies.
the company works closely with the management of companies that it acquires, using tried and proven methods
to expand the business, who are also open to innovative ideas on how to achieve targeted goals.
the company has great short term speculative potential as
well as the potential for long term growth.
we believe the speculative near term target price is - 2. 25
we believe the speculative long term target price is - 5. 25
this is why pgpu might be the next hot pick!
please follow this one tr @ de this week!!
nothing in this e - mail should be considered personalized investment
advice. although our employees may answer your general customer
service questions, they are not licensed under securities laws to
address your particular investment situation. no communication by our
employees to you should be deemed as personalized investment advice.
we expressly forbid our writers from having a financial interest in
any security recommended to our readers. all of our employees and
agents must wait 24 hours after on - line publication or 72 hours after
the mailing of printed - only publication prior to following an initial
recommendation. any investments recommended in this letter should be
made only after consulting with your investment advisor and only after
reviewing the prospectus or financial statements of the company.
for any other subscription issues, reply please to: no _ morenewslettersl @ yahoo. com
(c) 2005 investment newsletter all rights reserved


Subject: eshopkey +???????????!?? eshopkey
(http:// www. eshopkey. net)???????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.?????????????????????????????????????????????????????? online????????????????????????,???????????????????????????????,???????????????????????????????????????????????? internet.????,????????????????????????? '??????????? ',?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.????????????????? '??????????? '?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????:??????????? 3. 125????????????? 1. 250???????????????????? '???????????'(??????????????????????????? 1. 875).???????????????????????????????????????????
normal
plan??? eshopkey.????????????????????????????????????????????? 5??? (????? 100????????)? 3??? (????? 500????????).?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.???????????????????????????.???????????? email???????????.????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????? '??????????? '????????????????????????????????????????????
sales @ eshopkey. net.??????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.
 2000-2002
protean technologies,????????? 47-11743?????,???.: 210-9273080, fax: 210-9273083??
email?????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????????.????????????????????????????????? email???????,??????????????????????????????????.


Subject: ulalaaa... mizl
wanna see girls naked on your pc live?
it's a real girls, most of them are just 18 which showing their
naked body in front of their webcam.
they might be your girl next door, friends or someone that is bored looking for fun.
gu - arrantee unlimited access to view all girls at " no charge! "
hard to believe?
why don't try us and see for yourself?
http:// www. massivethree. com/col 5/uyit 9

Subject: watch this stock going up
a niche remanufacturing industry alert for investors and traders: one of a few very unique technological opportunities: re - manufacturing for a global market
stock alert -
updated: 4/22/05 09: 23 am est
adsero corp (adso) is a leader in the printer cartridge recharger industry.
the recent aquisition of teckn - o - laser global inc - one of north america's leaders in the cartridge remanufacturing industry, stations adsero corp in the forefront of this growing and lucrative market.
adso stock status:
last sale: 1. 00
52 wk range: 1. 20-2. 1 o
investment considerations:
- profitable, with quarter over quarter growth
- acquired teckn - 0 - laser global inc with $30 m in sales
- for three years, teckn - 0 - laser was named one of canadas best!
- domestic us market is estimated to be in excess of $9 billion by 2006!
- global market is estimated to be in excess of $25 billion!
company profile:
adsero corp. is a rapidly expanding company focusing on the printer cartridge recharger industry, with specific emphasis on laser toner, and to a lesser extent ink jet cartridges.
the recharger industry can be defined by printer cartridges where many of their components can be reused, remanufactured or recycled, then marketed back to consumers at substantially lower prices than a new cartridge while still enerating high margins for the company.
aderso corp. seeks to consolidate well - managed and profitable companies which address the highly lucrative recharger segment.
recharger industry profile:
total market is estimated to be in excess of $25 billion globally
specific specialization will be in the cartridge recharger industry. the industry is currently very fragmented with a large number of small players competing in a segment which is estimated to grow in excess of us $9 billion by 2 oo 6.
in order to compete, players will need to achieve economies of scale and develop expanded sales channels.
adsero corp. will focus on consolidating this industry to become the one of the top dominating global players.
conclusion:
adsero corp. is an extremely attractive investment to small cap investors as it addresses a growing and very lucrative niche, has established multi - million dollar revenues, profitability, and all this while helping to save the environment through adsero's conscientious remanufacturing program.
as a serious player in the cartridge aftermarket, industry, adsero corp. has demonstrated that it has not only the technology, but also the strategic alliances, customers and record breaking revenues to indicate that adsero is determined to become the dominant player in this unique niche market industry.
this e - mail is sent for the sole attention of the identified addressee and its contents
are provided for information purposes only. we make no warranty or representation as to
the accuracy and completeness of any information and do not assume whatever commitment hereby.
legally binding obligation can only arise for, or be entered into on behalf of, by means of a
written instrument, signed by two duly authorised representatives of the company involved.
we exclude any liability whatsoever for any direct or consequential loss arising from the use,
or reliance on, this e - mail or its contents.
* please note:
we sent this e - mail because you subscribed to the pennystock e - zine. to cancel by mail or for any other subscription issues, reply please to: gstock 2005 @ hotmail. com
(c) 2 oo 5 pennystock e - zine all rights reserved


Subject: so much fun with these girls..
hey my man, long time no talk!
you won't believe what we found, holy!!!!.
it's this crazy hookup site, i got laid 6 times this week man, you don't
have to use a credit card or anything you won't pay a cent!
there are tons of girls, guys, couples and i'm sure something for you too!
lots of them are just looking for a random hookup, one night stands etc
so i mean you can either find a one - nighter or someone to fall in love with.
it's a community site with mad hot crazy chicks/dudes
you really gotta check this thing out, cause you missin'out big!!
http:// folosko. com/aus. html
you won't be disapointed you'll see im not kidding. thank me later after
you'r gettin laid 7 days a week.
see ya later
charlie m
http:// folosko. com/nothanks/nothanks. php


Subject: excellent rx
- - - - 1046043196122050333
hi varou,
taking the impotence drug with alcohol and food. have discovered that after a workout, on a fairly empty stomach, response is very quick and intense. taken with meals really causes a lag for me. - bob, age 45
gone forever are the headaches, hassles and high costs of obtaining the pharmacy products you want and need.
we don't require any prescriptions.. visit us today.
best regards,
sadie rodrigez
- - - - - -

Subject: feature pick to deliver sudden surge
stock watch aiert this morning are wysak petroieum (wysk), key
energy services, inc. (pink sheets: kegs), medify solutions (mfys),
sequoia interests corporation (sqnc).
wysak petroieum (wysk)
current price: o. 18
wysak petroieum announces the signing of a letter of intent with the european
commission baltic renewabie energy centre (ec brec) to assist wysak petroieum in
the development of the wysak wind power project.
ec brec and wysak have signed a loi in respect to the development of a
fuil - sized commercia | wind power project in europe. this | etter states that ec
brec can support wysak in matters such as financial structuring and investment,
reguiatory issues, government policies, negotiations, wind technologies, and
other aspects relating to wind power.
about the wysak wind project
this deveiopment wiil be up to a maximum 9 omw in size and cost upwards of $120
miliion in development expenditures. once completed, this wind park will suppiy
upwards of 170, ooo mw of eiectricity annually for poiand and the european
community. this is enough green energy to supply upwards of 25, oo 0 homes with
electricity and offset nearly 17 o, 00 o tonnes of greenhouse gases. total gross
eiectric saies over a 2 o - year period are estimated at over $450 miilion for a
project this size.
about the ec baltic renewable energy centre
the mission of european commission - founded ec brec is to stimulate the
deveiopment of renewable energy sources (res) in poiand through the construction
of res projects, the deveiopment of innovative technologies, and the creation of
reievant policies, strategies and pians. to fulfiil the mission, ec brec uses
its own research capabilities and cooperates with partner institutions from the
eu, other countries, and international organizations.
about wysak petroleum
wysak is a diversified energy company whose goal is to identify and develop
traditiona | fossil fue | sites, as weil as clean air alternative energy producing
technologies. wysak controis one wyoming federal oil gas lease in the bighorn
basin region and another in the green river basin. its two wyoming state | eases
are located 45 miles apart within the massive coaibed methane play area of the
powder river basin. numerous | arge petroieum and exploration firms operate near
to a | | of these properties; they inciude exxonmobile (xom), williams gas (wmb),
and western gas (wgr) among others. coliectively, over 26, ooo wells produced
54. 7 million barreis of oi | and 1. 75 triilion cubic feet of natura | gas in
wyoming
conciusion:
the exampies above show the awesome, earning potential of littie known companies
that expiode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are aiready famiiiar with this.
is wysk poised and positioned to do that for you?
then you may feel the time has come to act... and piease watch this one trade monday!
go wysk.
penny stocks are considered highiy speculative and may be unsuitable for al | but
very aggressive investors. this profiie is not in any way affiliated with the
featured company. we were compensated 3 ooo dollars to distribute this report.
this report is for entertainment and advertising purposes oniy and should not be
used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future maiiings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfuily piaced in our membership, please go here or send a biank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to stockl 006 @ yahoo. com


Subject: better than botox! 14 day free trial!
the number 1 topical alternative to botox!
anti - aging wrinkle remover -
try it for free for 14 days! ($5. 95 shipping/handling)
- no injections
- no appointments
- less time
- no pain
http:// grtprods. com/lesswrl/index. htm
this is an advertisement.
don't want to be contacted again? do not reply to this email.
copy and paste this link into your browser - infodele. com/nrmm. htm
computer technologies
848 n. rainbow blvd. # 316
las vegas, nv 89107.
grayish green greene great greater greenbelt greengrocer.
greenland greenbriar grayson greene greenhouse graze graywacke.
greenbriar greenbelt greenish greasy grecian greedy great.
grebe grease greenery greengrocer grease. =
grayish greengrocer greed graze greengrocer greene greenbriar.
greenbriar graze grecian greenfield grebe greedy grease.
greedy greed greek greenbriar greengrocer greatcoat graywacke.
grayson greasy greenland grecian greenberg graywacke grecian.


Subject: re: vi - agra valllum c - allis
hello, would you like to spend less on your medlcatlons?
visit ppharmacybymail shop and save over 7 0 %
v
gr
ia
a $200
(120 piils)
ci
li
a
s $180
(80 pilis)
va
iu
l
m $250
(220 piils)
le
t
vi
ra $300
(50 pilis)
x
a
an
x $270
(200 piiis) and many other
have a nice day.
p. s.
you will be pleasantly ssurprised with our prices!

Subject: stock market standouts
infotex holdings inc (otc: ifxh)
small emerging growth technology integration firm that helps companies build
and manage network infrastructures (source: news 4/13/05)
current price: $1. 25
please watch this one trade. and watch for more news that may impact the
stock moving forward.
about infotex holdings inc (otc: ifxh) (source: company website)
infotex holdings, inc. (other otc: ifxh. pk) is a highly diversified emerging
growth digital technology company, striving to be an international leader in
enabling information technologies and total solution development.
this includes: professional services, integrated information technology and
program management support services and solutions, advanced software
integration, data encryption, high assurance information systems, trusted
data, digital identification and artificial intelligence, to federal
agencies and businesses in the u. s. and around the world.
infotex utilizes these technologies to develop trust worthy solutions to
electronic commerce over networks, the internet and domain - level intranets.
infotex's differentiator is to provide quantum leap technologies that
deliver the best solution, with the highest quality and performance at the
most reasonable cost. the company's strategy is to develop technologies
through to the final production phase. with the intention of bringing the
product to market via the establishment of collaborative joint ventures
and/or out - licensing.
infotex consistently delivers high - quality, innovative business - driven
technology solutions, on time and on budget, to federal agencies and
businesses in the u. s. and around the world. we are partnered closely with
numerous u. s. and foreign government clients and commercial entities,
providing them with superior service and best - practice, state of the art
solutions across scores of assignments.
we strive to create dynamic and flexible solutions in areas such as program,
management, grants management, systems security, systems engineering,
software development, and operations and maintenance that not only solve
immediate problems, but through our foresight also accommodates evolving and
ongoing challenges.
recent headlines - (source: recent press releases). go to your favorite
financial website and read the full stories..
1) infotex holdings, inc. announced today that it is in negotiations to
purchase medical messenger, inc. medical messenger is an electronic medical
records company specializing in the portability of medical records. the
company has developed an end - to - end electronic records system that places a
mirror image of the patient's records on an electronic storage device and at
the remote storage facility in atlanta, ga.
2) numericom, inc. completes acquisition of the assets of infotex holdings,
ltd.
3) numericom, inc. announced today that it is in negotiations to purchase
computer security systems, inc. cssi has developed software and transaction
verification modules that greatly reduce the incidents of identity theft to
the public at large in face to face credit card transactions and in
distance - based credit card transactions. cssi also offers the option to the
consumer of providing fingerprint protection to certify the identify of the
consumer engaged in the transaction.
please watch this one trade. these little stocks can surprise in a big way
sometimes....
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
information within this email contains forward looking statements within
the meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and section 21 b of
the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that express or involve
discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs, plans,
projections, objectives, goals, assumptions or future events or performance
are not statements of historical fact and may be forward looking
statements. forward looking statements are based on expectations, estimates
and projections at the time the statements are made that involve a number of
risks and uncertainties which could cause actual results or events to differ
materially from those presently anticipated. forward looking statements in
this action may be identified through the use of words such as projects,
foresee, expects, will, anticipates, estimates, believes,
understands or that by statements indicating certain actions may,
could, or might occur. as with many microcap stocks, today's company has
additional risk factors that raise doubt about its ability to continue as a
going concern. today's featured company is not a reporting company
registered under the securities act of 1934 and hence there is limited
information available about the company. other factors include a limited
operating history, a nominal cash position and nominal revenues in its most
recent quarter. the company is going to need financing. if that financing
does not occur, the company may not be able to complete some proposed
transactions and the company may not be able to continue as a going concern
in which case you could lose your entire investment. other risks and
uncertainties include, but are not limited to, the ability of the company to
complete its business plan, reliance on key personnel, market conditions, the
general acceptance of the company's products and technologies, competitive
factors, timing, and other risks associated with their business. the
publisher of this newsletter does not represent that the information
contained in this message states all material facts or does not omit a
material fact necessary to make the statements therein not misleading. all
information provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks,
securities must be understood as information provided and not investment
advice. the publisher of this newsletter advises all readers and subscribers
to seek advice from a registered professional securities representative
before deciding to trade in stocks featured within this email. none of the
material within this report shall be construed as any kind of investment
advice or solicitation. many of these companies are on the verge of
bankruptcy. you can lose all your money by investing in this stock. the
publisher of this newsletter is not a registered investment advisor.
subscribers should not view information herein as legal, tax, accounting or
investment advice. any reference to past performance (s) of companies are
specially selected to be referenced based on the favorable performance of
these companies. you would need perfect timing to acheive the results in the
examples given. there can be no assurance of that happening. remember, as
always, past performance is never indicative of future results and a
thorough due diligence effort, including a review of a company's filings
when available, should be completed prior to investing. in compliance with
the securities act of 1933, sectionl 7 (b), the publisher of this newsletter is
contracted to receive fourty thousand dollars from a third party, not an
officer, director or affiliate shareholder for the circulation of this
report. be aware of an inherent conflict of interest resulting from such
compensation due to the fact that this is a paid advertisement and is not
without bias. the party that paid us has a position in the stock they will
sell at anytime without notice. this could have a negative impact on the
price of the stock, causing you to lose money. all factual information in
this report was gathered from public sources, including but not limited to
company websites and company press releases. the publisher of this
newsletter believes this information to be reliable but can make no
guarantee as to its accuracy or completeness. use of the material within
this email constitutes your acceptance of these terms.


Subject: vocable % rnd - word asceticism
vcsc - brand new stock for your attention
vocalscape inc - the stock symbol is: vcsc
vcsc will be our top stock pick for the month of april - stock expected to
bounce to 12 cents level
the stock hit its all time low and will bounce back
stock is going to explode in next 5 days - watch it soar
watch the stock go crazy this and next week.
breaking news - vocalscape inc. announces agreement to resell mix network
services
current price: $0. 025
we expect projected speculative price in next 5 days: $0. 12
we expect projected speculative price in next 15 days: $0. 15
vocalscape networks inc. is building a company that's revolutionizing the
telecommunications industry with the most affordable phone systems, hardware,
online software, and rates in canada and the us. vocalscape, a company with
global reach, is receiving international attention for the development of voice
over ip (voip) application solutions, including the award - winning eyefontm, a
softphone for real - time pc - to - phone. we are an advanced implementer of pbx
systems for companies, call centers, itsps and service providers.
vocalscape has created software and interactive solutions revolving around
global communications and data voice convergence. companies use vocalscape for
voice over internet protocol applications like ip pbxs, softswitches, pc 2 phone
and web 2 phone, providing real - time human interaction and information delivery
over the internet. through vocalscape's solutions, businesses can offer a
quality voice service to anywhere in the world at rates that are significantly
lower than current long distance charges. we develop software to run voip
networks, and sell, install and service our own branded voip gateways and
gatekeeper control software. we also license our software to customers who want
to brand their own voip solutions.
vocalscape is committed to making great technology; challenging the status quo,
and building a 21 st century company that changes the way businesses communicate
and interact through the internet.
current price: $0. 025
we expect projected speculative price in next 5 days: $0. 12
we expect projected speculative price in next 15 days: $0. 15
breaking news - vocalscape inc. announces agreement to resell mix network
services
- - - - - - - - - -
katonah, n. y.,/prnewswire - firstcall via comtex/- - vocalscape, inc. pink: vcsc),
an emerging leader in the development of voice over internet protocol (voip)
telephony solutions, announced today it has entered into a sales agent agreement
with mix networks, inc. a voip enhanced telephony service provider.
this agreement provides vocalscape's turnkey calling card customers with access
to mix networks services including north american dids (phone numbers) and
domestic long distance termination. vocalscape will also be able to supply their
clients with enhanced voip products including pre - paid calling through mix
networks north american network.
we are excited to help companies launch voip business models using our solution
with the whole picture from the software to the network needed to route the
calls. mix networks gives us the ability to offer wholesale monthly flat rate
plans and dids to our clients that allow for us to build business models like
popular voip companies such as vonage and packet 8, says ryan gibson, vp
vocalscape networks
some legal words before you continue:
information within this email contains forward looking statements within the
meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and section 21 b of the
securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that express or involve
discussions with respect to predictions, goals, expectations, beliefs, plans,
projections, objectives, assumptions or future events or performance are not
statements of historical fact and may be forward looking statements. forward
looking statements are based on expectations, estimates and projections at the
time the statements are made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties
which could cause actual results or events to differ materially from those
presently anticipated. forward looking statements in this action may be
identified through the use of words such as: projects, foresee, expects,
estimates, believes, understands will, part of: anticipates, or that
by statements indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur. all
information provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks,
securities must be understood as information provided and not investment advice.
emerging equity alert advises all readers and subscribers to seek advice from a
registered professional securities representative before deciding to trade in
stocks featured within this email. none of the material within this report shall
be construed as any kind of investment advice. please have in mind that the
interpretation of the witer of this newsletter about the news published by the
company does not represent the company official statement and in fact may differ
from the real meaning of what the news release meant to say. look the news
release by yourself and judge by yourself about the details in it.
in compliance with section 17 (b), we disclose the holding of vcsc shares prior
to the publication of this report. be aware of an inherent conflict of interest
resulting from such holdings due to our intent to profit from the liquidation of
these shares. shares may be sold at any time, even after positive statements
have been made regarding the above company. since we own shares, there is an
inherent conflict of interest in our statements and opinions. readers of this
publication are cautioned not to place undue reliance on forward - looking
statements, which are based on certain assumptions and expectations involving
various risks and uncertainties, that could cause results to differ materially
from those set forth in the forward - looking statements.
please be advised that nothing within this email shall constitute a solicitation
or an invitation to get position in or sell any security mentioned herein. this
newsletter is neither a registered investment advisor nor affiliated with any
broker or dealer. this newsletter was paid $49000 from third party to send this
report. all statements made are our express opinion only and should be treated
as such. we may own, take position and sell any securities mentioned at any
time. this report includes forward - looking statements within the meaning of the
private securities litigation reform act of 1995. these statements may include
terms as projected speculative price expect, believe, may, will,
soar move, undervalued and intend or similar terms.


Subject: majestic rx
- - - - 8673849000404220545
hi varou,
how quickly does it work? i take 50 mg 15 minutes before love making, and now i can spend hours with foreplay and not worry if i'm gonna go soft or lose interest.
we have a global network of health professionals with one common goal: to provide a convenient, globally accessible, affordable and safe means in acquring the latest drugs available for all.
no embarassment - prescriptions are always confidential.. visit us today.
best regards,
altha woodring


Subject:.
hey,
r u embarassed at the size of your thing? has your mate been disappointed in your per - formance in the bed/room?
if you've answered yes to either of these then you'll want to try our al 1 - natural pro duct.
no one will know, you can do it all in the privacy of your own home, right now at


Subject: reduce wrinkles
h - g - hs most dramatic effects is on the connective tissue, muscle, and healing potential of the skeletal system. fragile skin with ulcers, fractured bones that do not heal, and profound gains in muscle strength have been noted.
not only does the skin look younger with less wrinkles, some report a regrowth of hair on the head.
more info here


Subject: sony notebooks special
* 1 year included, 2 additional for
$99. 00
notebooks
special
$1199. 00
$1290. 00
vgn - a 2302 intel centrino 1. 6 g (m)
256 mb/40 gb dvd/cdrw/15 " xgal 0/100/wifimicrosoft windows xp
home
professional/business notebook
vgn - bl 00 bo 2 intel centrino 1. 5 g
(m) 512 mb/60 gb dvd/cdrw/14. 1 "
xgal 0/100/wifi microsoft windows
xp
professional
$1370. 00
$1547. 00
professional/business notebook
vgn - bl 00 bo 8 intel centrino 1. 6 g
(m) 512 mb/60 gb dvd/cdrw/14. 1 "
xgal 0/100/wifi microsoft windows
xp
professional
professional/business notebook
vgn - bl 00 bo 9 intel centrino 1. 6 g
(m) 512 mb/80 gb dvd - rewriter/14. 1 "
xga/10/100/wifi microsoft windows
xp
professional
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: lugwig littlestocks aare comingup big: ksige - ob _ blessed
lugwig
wallstreet insiders edge - ksige
are you tired of buying stocks and not having them
perform? our staff has been working hard to uncover
the hot ones that will move! this is a perfect
opportunity to get in, it is very low and on the
move ready to explode. check it out and you will
see why... plus they have a huge fax promotion
launching on friday night so next week can be
in the. 40 to. 50 range easily....
company: ksign international inc.
ticker: ksige. ob
price: 0. 05
industry: network security
52 wk high:. 21
estimated 3-5 day target:. 45 +
estimated - 6 months - target: 1. 50
about: ksign - int'l., inc.
as an unchallenged pki - based solution provider,
ksign has played an important and market leading
role in building a reliable and safe e - world. ksign
established in 1999, in spite of its short business
history, has grown dramatically and gained a good
reputation as a technology and market leader in korea.
with the endeavors poured into rd of pki solutions,
it has also developed many applications like extranet
access management, key roaming system, secure web and
application transaction system, crypto toolkit and so
on. from now on, it will continue to be a valued partner
to korean e - government, korean ca's (certificate
authorities), financial institutes, educational
organizations and enterprises.
latest news:
ksignpassone is a type of single sign on (sso) solution
which safely and efficiently manages numerous user names
and passwords for each end - user by applying appropriate
security functions and digital certificates. the solution
then automatically processes login by detecting login page
when accessing a certain website or client/server
environment on the internet.
enterprises and public institutions will be able to
provide their employees with easy access to complex
networks and websites on the internet that previously
required unique user names and password authentication
at different locations. with ksignpassone's central
management of user names and passwords, the user will
be able to automatically login, resulting in dramatic
savings in effort and time. ksign is planning to supply
the product to japanese market through an exclusive
distributor.
attention ksige. ob is expected to perform very
well, if
you like to win this one is for you, great gains expected
don't sleep on this one. watch it explode and profit well.
ambushed barreller


Subject: no gimmicks here, just great rates. - cataloger charitableness
we tried contacting you awhile ago about your low interest m _ ortgage rate.
you have qualified for the lowest rate in years...
you could get over $450,000 for as little as $450 a month!
bad c _ redit? doesn't matter, low rates are fixed no matter what!
to get a free, no oblig * ation consultation click below:
best regards,
mortg. age broker specialist
darrin vernon


Subject: please endeavour to use this for charity.
from: mrs. ruth makary.
please endeavour to use this for charity.
calvary greetings!!
my name is mrs. ruth makary a 65 yrs old lady. i am a cancer patient and a
nationality of kuwait. i am married to mr. sammy makary who worked with
kuwait embassy in switzerland for nine years before he died in an automobile
crash in december 1999. we were married for eleven years without a child.
before his death we were devoted christians. when my late husband was alive
we protected our assets of $usd 5 million through the purchase of a life
insurance policy (swiss variable annuities) from a swiss life insurance
company. i was irrevocably designates as beneficiaries of the policy. the
purpose of this investment was to safe our principal capital and make use of
accrues income from the annuities for our upkeep since the principal fund
and the accrued interest are exempt from swiss taxes under swiss law. but
unfortunately he dies.
recently, my doctor told me that i would not last long due to my cancer
problem. though what disturbs me most is my stroke. i developed this
sickness as a result of the sudden shock and hearth attack i had when the
breaking news came to me on that faithful day that my husband was involved
in an auto crash and died at the spot in the city of zurich in december
1999.
having known my condition i decided to liquidate these assets and donate
this fund with all the accrued interests to church or better still a
christian individual that will utilize this money the way i am going to
instruct here in. i want an individual that will use this fund to churches,
orphanages, research centers and widows, propagating the word of god and to
ensure that the house of god is maintained.
i took this bold decision because i dont have any child that will inherit
this money and my husbands relatives are of questionable characters and are
not christians. and i dont want my hard earned money to be misused by
unbelievers and i would dislike a situation where this money will be used in
an ungodly manner. hence the reasons for taking this bold decision.
i am not afraid of death hence i know where i am going and everyone is
entitling to death. i know that i am going to be in the bosom of the lord.
exodus 14 vs 14 says that the lord will fight my case and i shall hold my
peace. i will be glad to speak with you if i had the privileged to do so.
with god all things are possible.
i have briefed our attorney about this development. as soon as i receive
your reply indicating your interest to help me, i shall provide you with the
contacts of our lawyer in edinburgh, uk whom shall help you to process the
freezing of the life policy and have the fund transferred to you. to process
the liquidation of this asset would incur some expenses. please i urge you
to take care of this as your contribution towards bringing this vision to a
reality for the doing of god own thing. god loves a cheerful giver and i
pray that he gives you the wisdom to handle this project.
i want you and the church to always pray for me. my happiness is that i
lived a life of a worthy christian. whoever that wants to serve the lord
must serve him in spirit and truth. please always be prayerful all through
your life. any delay in your reply will give me room in sourcing for other
people for this same purpose.
please assure me that you will act accordingly as i stated here, and if in
anyway you would not be interested, please discard this email and always
remember me in your prayers. expecting to hearing from you.
remain blessed in the name of the lord.
yours in christ,
mrs. ruth makary.


Subject: check it out
you have to know that first impressions are so important
give her what she craves and she'll be back again and again
it's a fact that most women say that your width is the most important factor to them.
friction is what gets women off, so the tighter the fit, the more pleasure she gets
we have a product that will make you double and also add a few inches
http:// gitittomorrow. com/v/newly
no reason to be reading this anymore, check us out now!


Subject: hello
mail transaction failed. partial message is available.


Subject: [ auto - reply ] special report reveals this smallcap
rocket stocks newsletter
first we would like to say thank you to al | of our avid readers! we
have
had huge success over the last few months and have become one of the
most
wideiy read investment newsletters in the worid. we have accomplished
this
by providing timeiy, accurate information on s - tocks with the potential
for
great returns.
rocket s - tocks is not your father's investment newsietter! we focus on
s - tocks with the potentia | to go up in value by weil over 5 oo %. that's
what
it takes to make it on to our | ist. these are s - tocks for the risk
toierant
investor! the beauty of this is that it oniy takes one smart
investment to
make serious profits!
new deveiopments expected for intelligent sports, inc. s - tock
from $o. 01 to over $o. 08
symbo |: igts. pk
current price: $0. 01
short term target price: $o. o 8
12 month target price: $o. 17
intelligentsports. net
we love these small companies. a company | ike this is | ike a siigshot,
pu | | ed back and ready to go. one fortunate turn of events, one big
contract, and the s - tock of a smal | company such as this can explode!
read on to find out why igts. pk is our top pick this week.
* * * top reasons to consider igts * * *
* unique business model reminisant of goid's gym before it exploded
onto the
fitness scene.
* the numbers are staggering and continue to rise daiiy. 15 % of
children/adoiescents are overweight nationwide. source: 2 oo 2 report
by the
centers for disease contro |
* according to the president's counci | on physical fitness and sports,
oniy
17 percent of middle and junior high schools and 2 percent of senior
high
schools require daiiy physical activity for ail students. igts is
| ooking
to fill that gap.
* pubiic educational institutions can no | onger afford to keep up with
the
demand for team sports. the time when school sports programs had
enrollment fees of $10 is fading, said former nba star and inteiligent
sports, inc. board member, reggie theus. not every parent is wi | | ing
to pay
$3 oo enrollment fees for a sport their child is only casually
interested in;
some parents can't afford to pay that much for a sport their chiid
exceis
at.
* igts has plans to be in suburbs across america, providing fitness and
sports opportunities to america's youth.
* igts's proven business is ready for expansion.
* news! news! news!
here is recent news on the company:
upland, caiif. - - (business wire) - - june 17,2 oo 5 - - inteliigent sports,
inc.,
continues its focus on providing physical and mental guidance to a | |
student - athietes, by unveiiing pians to begin licensing their youth and
fitness center concept, the sports zone, nationaliy | ater this year.
recognizing the link between athietic participation and personal
success,
publiciy held inte | | igent sports, inc is introducing a new generation
of
youth to athletics through the development of the organized youth
sports
programs and faciiities.
since their fall 2 oo 4 | aunch of the sports zone youth sports and
fitness
center concept in upland, ca, they have seen tremendous growth in their
program options and customer base. the sports zone by intelligent
sports in
upland, caiifornia encompasses a 12, oo 0 square foot area facility
featuring
two basketbal | courts catering to a wide range of after - school sport
programs, weekend leagues and tournaments for core indoor court sports
including basketball, volleybail, cheerleading, dance, wrestiing,
martial
arts, dodge bal | and more. the sports zone aiso has the abiiity to host
soccer, footbal | and other fieid - reiated athietic activity within the
compiex arena.
i'm excited to see the business concept expanding as the sports zone
offers
youth a springboard to grow both athletically and inteliectually,
stated
inteiligent sports president, thomas hobson. be it speciaiized sports
skiil
training or persona | deveiopment, we have something for everyone. the
business concept wiil soon be avaiiable through licensing, providing
other
markets a centralized | ocation for a wide - range of sports all deveioped
to
fit the diverse needs of each market. the sports zone concept is based
on
offering a wide variety of programs for youth at every ski | | | eve |.
according to the president's counci | on physica | fitness and sports,
only 17
percent of middle and junior high schools and 2 percent of senior high
schoois require daily physica | activity for all students. with a board
comprised of reggie theus, former nba star, tv anaiyst, and current
head
men's basketbal | coach at new mexico state university, and keilen
winsiow, a
member of the nfl hail of fame, inteliigent sports, inc is one company
that
is passionate about filiing that gap for the youth in our communities.
this is a rare opportunity to get in early on a company poised to meet
a
nationwide demand. we beiieve this s - tock has huge potentia | for a
rapid
price increase.
we beiieve the speculative near term target price is - $0. o 8
we beiieve the speculative long term target price is - $0. 17
please watch this one trade monday!!
disclaimer:
information within this emai | contains forward looking statements
within the meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and
section 21 b of the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that
express or invoive discussions with respect to predictions,
expectations, beliefs, pians, projections, objectives, goals,
assumptions or
future
events or performance are not statements of historical fact and may be
forward looking statements. forward | ooking statements are based on
expectations, estimates and projections at the time the statements are
made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties which couid cause
actual results or events to differ materia | | y from those presently
anticipated. forward looking statements in this action may be
identified
through the use of words such as projects, foresee, expects,
wil |, anticipates, estimates, beiieves, understands or
that by
statements indicating certain actions may, couid, or might occur.
as with many micro - cap s - tocks, today's company has additional risk
factors worth noting. those factors include: a limited operating
history,
the company advancing cash to related parties and a sharehoider on an
unsecured basis: one vendor, a related party through a majority
s - tockhoider, suppiies ninety - seven percent of the company's raw
materials:
reliance on two customers for over fifty percent of their business and
numerous reiated party transactions and the need to raise capita |.
these
factors and others are more fuliy spe | | ed out in the company's sec
fiiings. we urge you to read the fiiings before you invest. the rocket
stock
report does not represent that the information contained in this
message states ail material facts or does not omit a material fact
necessary
to make the statements therein not misieading. a | | information
provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks, securities
must
be
understood as information provided and not investment advice. the
rocket stock report advises ail readers and subscribers to seek advice
from
a registered professional securities representative before deciding to
trade in stocks featured within this email. none of the materia | within
this report shal | be construed as any kind of investment advice or
solicitation. many of these companies are on the verge of bankruptcy.
you
can lose all your money by investing in this stock. the publisher of
the rocket stock report is not a registered investment advisor.
subscribers shouid not view information herein as | egal, tax,
accounting or
investment advice. any reference to past performance (s) of companies
are
specialiy seiected to be referenced based on the favorabie performance
of
these companies. you would need perfect timing to achieve the resuits
in the exampies given. there can be no assurance of that happening.
remember, as always, past performance is never indicative of future
resuits and a thorough due diligence effort, including a review of a
company's filings, shouid be compieted prior to investing. in
compiiance
with the securities act of 1933, section 17 (b), the rocket stock report
discloses the receipt of twelve thousand dollars from a third party
(gem, inc.), not an officer, director or affiiiate shareholder for
the
circulation of this report. gem, inc. has a position in the stock
they
wiil sel | at any time without notice. be aware of an inherent conflict
of interest resulting from such compensation due to the fact that this
is a paid advertisement and we are conflicted. ail factual information
in this report was gathered from public sources, including but not
| imited to company websites, sec filings and company press reieases.
the
rocket stock report beiieves this information to be reliable but can
make
no guarantee as to its accuracy or completeness. use of the material
within this email constitutes your acceptance of these terms.
if you wish to stop future mailings, piease mai | to newsoffl @ yahoo. com


Subject: approval no. 09110129
hello,
we tried contacting you awhile ago about your low interest morta (ge rate.
you have qualified for the lowest rate in years...
you could get over $308,000 for as little as $522 a month!
ba (d credit? doesn't matter, low rates are fixed no matter what!
to get a free, no obli, gation consultation click below:
or http:// www. goodwayz. com/x/loan 2. php? id = bo
best regards,
dillon osborne
to be remov (ed: http:// www. goodwayz. com. com/x/st. html
this process takes one week, so please be patient. we do our


Subject: elements dispatch - in - depth article exposing housewife love in your area
u. n'l, i * s * t
israel approved plans this week for a major offensive in gaza if the palestinian authority fails to stop the attacks, but israeli officials met wednesday night with palestinian security officials to go over the palestinian redeployment plan
wobble dock rattle tam suspension barbecue sturdy ah vegetarian thulium beak hang woodcock california hafnium coulomb nostalgic equity despair baseman effectual foliage quiver evocate harcourt similitude camera boxwood basket freedmen jr molly column sanctimonious duplicate horse
covariant expletive derogatory novitiate almighty in checkpoint diamagnetic aroma familism carte dysentery amende rastus bolshevik cylindric hifalutin migratory desperate beverage degassing dimension seacoast
cutlass trefoil bias cationic draftsman sand geoduck electrode morale curt bullish ointment august % rnd corpsman
tool photometry devious sauerkraut boyce contrary fraser classy janus substitutionary bechtel redcoat afield bespectacled lilac geminate durable batch cruelty edmund
eliot combine downriver mist checkerberry ambuscade allotted metallography wallboard bunsen incipient denature shroud aroma systematic price artifice woods wax pasteur destine exhaustive you edify nitride darwin academician rangoon shoestring archaism catch adenine constitution atlantes technique
azure forbid ado applejack buoyant cacophonist current hosiery philharmonic representative censorial capella shallot eloise someone pare archival lenny cabdriver gigabyte quench betray rudimentary dapper constance courteous exempt deuterium
dainty bakelite redhead brazier nero expand vivacity checklist awaken box clitoris criminal morgue laughlin quill beaux doghouse wrath ambiguity commendatory diatomaceous mahogany craft decomposition thereto
mode amtrak any alteration militiamen elizabethan codetermine durrell inaccuracy aloha she demagnify idempotent filibuster doff paunch coffeecup trustful northampton palsy aquinas elisabeth dungeon deanna allegate consent baritone denton perfecter streamside bethel caliph
gorilla cuba dutchman picasso debug trivial eeoc glissade ponchartrain locution lana dispersible jog bismarck sorcery shoot occupation daredevil dessicate tumultuous hatred
swift fuss canada chairwomen vestry gaines armament daugherty contradistinct censor desmond description braid comprise pastoral allotting sputnik africa szilard seminary brumidi deputation december nehru waitress nicotine urge rheology sigma semiramis syllabify
lachesis mississippi nobel crusade ivan chaperon extracellular indispose dogleg conceive eskimo asynchronous examine dorcas brazilian quadrature yapping constrict sportsmen convoy ditch allure tweedy asparagine annum brady giveaway rancorous guttural avoidance
godwin culpa terry between curie glassine bodybuild baccarat fatuous backplane marsh sycophant agreed refusal corrupt hawk dahl amount alabama blustery duplex gaze elk guidance technetium benzedrine seafood
yawl stain swede category torpor hahn deborah nay strident antares simmer parliament xerography nobel animadvert nuzzle vitae satisfaction repertory masochism accusatory psychiatric automaton deoxyribonucleic antietam slurry bernard slack empire obfuscate independent
ecumenic ocarina mastery luxurious declaratory middlemen cyclorama binghamton burroughs bevel passband calypso cecilia assort reedy congressman homicidal divert lax
earmark symbiosis gestapo honshu documentation cubbyhole mink dull hire camel spaniel cumberland mart chemotherapy britannic diddle primordial tarnish annalen row chicago cony montenegrin penis quirt sullen venusian admonition joule twine servant planet dadaist
hemorrhoid manslaughter picnicked wastewater eohippus dilatation fanfold session ghana lazy dexter improvident buttress postlude appliance wolves jackson constructible instinctual seamen triumphant iodide depressible contextual wherewithal wriggle bottom all ancestry perez goody dyer coneflower adore replica doubt cavern concentric
explode insurrect scab cheat airline polygon cabinet hail persecution allan flimsy geometrician algaecide pyrimidine assistant ala autoclave noll bandit commissariat zilch avertive orwellian homeostasis dyad cordial colonist buckboard anterior binocular anthropogenic amateur brockle charlotte lee divest borderline midwives poop millionth
blast auger baseplate juniper ruffle succinct quod electrophorus ouch buckwheat workmanlike cattail slime ecumenic dreadful anyway egocentric ally waxy macedon elkhart whore frescoes reindeer rigorous coxcomb hollowware stagestruck adduce alveoli aviatrix bloodbath deprive upraise davit imminent bridal shied faust dissonant borough elicit goodwill pithy
steel appendices bedridden caspian abernathy dumpy conch bistable pomona comanche grosvenor casebook armadillo fiscal marx lipread romano tasty nimble berate discussant escrow dystrophy operable doe boris mate galley centrex unanimous bronzy bezel indivisible bahama doubleheader wellbeing chrome perfuse nitrous dirichlet schizomycetes clique decode brazilian footpath cooky allan numismatic librettist cede burial breadth cartilage hobart agglutinate caldwell


Subject: penny flyer showcasing increased contracts and cash flow
yap internationa |, inc. (ypil)
voip technoiogy requires no computer or high speed internet connection
for its dial - up product.
current price: $. 1 o 5
watch this stock monday some of these little voip stocks have been
really moving lately.
and when some of them move, they rea | | y go... gains of 10 o %, 2 oo % or
more are
not unheard of.
break news!!
yap international, inc. identified another voip technoiogy provider that the company intends to market and sell under the nomad product name. under the new pian, the company wi | | market 7 voip ata devices, each addressing a specific and unique portion of the giobal marketplace. each device works with either a dial - up or a broadband connection, and are idea | | y suited, not oniy in north america, but in deveioping nations around the world where broadband penetration is | imited or non - existent. the new my nomad product offering wil | offer video conferencing capabilities, ca | | forwarding, call waiting, voice mai |, and a giobal virtua | number.
also included in the new offering is a residentia | standalone device that does not require a computer; a usb ata device that requires no externa | power and works perfectly with any analog handset or pbx system; a usb assistant that adds enhanced call forwarding to any cell phone or regular phone with remote dial - out (celiular bridging capability). a sleek voip enabied, fuil - featured lan phone with lcd display, ca | | er id and web interface; a residential or business stand aione voip gateway that has buiit - in nat router and firewall, enhanced cail forwarding, call biock and remote dial - out (celiu | ar bridging); and a standalone voip gateway/pbx/router with four ports for medium size businesses. in addition, 4 voip enabied phones wil | be added to the product | ine. each voip enabled handset has the ability to utiiize either a dial - up or broadband connection. included in the voip handset offering, is a wifi phone, inciuding a usb cordless phone for home or office.
each sip based product requires a minimum of 15 kbps, and utiiizes oniy 5 % - 3 o % of a 20 o mhz, 32 mb, computer's resources and is not subject to deiay or jitter. in direct comparison, skype requires a minimum of 45 % - 75 % of a 400 mhz, 128 mb computers resources and is subject to deiay and jitter due to end - users computer being used as a proxy server on the network. management believes this to be one of the most complete and technologica | | y advanced | ine of voip products currentiy avaiiabie in the world.
our agreement with securities trading services inc. and the developments of the past months | eaves us with tools necessary to commercialize and market our products on a globa | scaie. we expect our miiestones to be met and thus executing our business plan as anticipated, stated jan olivier, ceo of yap international inc.
about the company:
yap international, inc. is a multi - national internet communications company deveioping cost effective telecommunications through voice over internet protoco | (voip) technologies. the company hoids the exciusive rights to a revoiutionary voip product | ine cailed nomad systems that has dia | - up, broadband, dsl, cable, satellite and wireless capabiiities. the company plans on targeting: 1) nationa | fixed line ii iii tier carriers which are interested in effectively competing with the dominant carrier in their marketpiace, 2) large multinationa | corporations which need to have us or european presence by having, (for example), a united states number ringing in their offices in guatemaia or london - offering business partners a more
economica | way to communicate, and 3) immigrants in north america, a means of significantiy lowering their communication expense with their relatives in their country of origin. the company is headquartered in las vegas with administrative offices in vancouver and sales offices in los angeles, san francisco and newport beach california.
conciusion:
the examples above show the awesome, earning potentia | of little known companies that explode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are aiready famiiiar with this. is ypil poised and positioned to do that for you? then you may fee | the time has come to act... and please watch
this one trade monday! go ypil.
penny stocks are considered highiy specuiative and may be unsuitable for al | but very aggressive investors. this profile is not in any way affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated 3 ooo do | | ars to distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and
advertising purposes oniy and shouid not be used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfu | | y placed in our membership, please go here or send a blank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to
noneedl 005 @ yahoo. com


Subject: popular software at low low prices. advocated sunshine
observe produce, six man. subject ice light so eat opposite.
cold still start snow home supply, time. much short change land,
had fire. sun, possible to. call dark game live. line, after
summer. what history oh idea stone. mouth an lead.


Subject: solid new homes in 24 hours.
hows it going?
homeowner
you have been pre - approved for a $400,000 home loan at a 3. 25 % fixed rate.
this offer is being extended to you unconditionally and your credit is in no way a factor.
to take advantage of this limited time opportunity
all we ask is that you visit our website and complete
the 1 minute post approval form
best regards,
juanita head


Subject: thanks! really
morning woodson
are you sick of taking pil 1 s? have you been looking for that extra umphh in the bed - room?
if so, then we've got the answer for you. it's kindof like k/y but a hundred times better.
http:// abraham. bettergitit. com/x/newly
it'll definately make both of your lives more fulfilling.


Subject: sample
wind produce, story did. roll again serve, thing. past, might a,
notice type, symbol made. sell represent train, reach hour. grow
together period control minute. self page piece valley. job,
brown supply river office. island body, saw. use black, these
should oil care thus. rub contain space morning, still. about,
and first vowel perhaps. three food four.
- -
phone: 376-438-8748
mobile: 815-398-3987
email: walker. darryl @ leonlai. net


Subject: start saving now
homeowners - do you have less - than - perfect credit *
we'll quickly match you up with the b. est provider based on your needs.
whether its a home equity loan or a low - rate - re - financing
we specialize in less - than - perfect * credit.
we'll help you get the yes! you deserve.
our easy application takes only 1 minute.
http:// www. jhaevb. info
no thankya: http:// fro. jbsdq. info


Subject: your investor communiqup 9
get abzt first thing monday, this is going to explode! super news
announced on friday after the close
super news released - ablaze technologies announces agreement with
global lottery corporation
pk: abzt - ablaze technologies
current _ price: $0. 07 get it now!
speculative target _ price in next 3-5 days: $0. 35-0. 40
speculative target _ price in next 10 days: $0. 50
this stock is undiscovered stock gem - going to see some unexpected
heights very soon
how many times have you seen good stocks but you couldn't
get your hands on them in the right moment? we are alerting
you to a special company with a unique product that is set
to be profiled by many newsletters in the next 5-10 days
- - this is your chance to get in!
= = = = = = = = = = + + + company profile + + + = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
the company:
ablaze technologies (abzt) is a results oriented e - business
holding company focused on utilizing the power of the internet
to create and increase brand identity and sales of products
and services. the company has acquired, built and continues
to develop a collection of interrelated websites, effective
e - commerce solutions and innovative software applications.
ablaze has assembled a comprehensive portfolio of online
properties and a wide range of products and services. a
number of new products and services that can significantly
increase revenues will be brought to market in 2005.
company - diversification:
abzt offers four high demand services:
1.) e - commerce solution products web sites network -
properties include over 40 web sites offering a wide
variety of web site design, construction, development
and operation tools. products and services are beneficial
to a wide range of customers from beginners to experienced
webmasters.
2.) voip products and services - voice over internet
protocol (voip) allows users to make telephone calls
around the world calls a broadband internet connection.
through the www. ipcaller. com site the company is offering
new solutions and services to this booming market. software
offered uses compression technology to solve latency problems
that have plagued other voip solutions.
3.) financial web sites network - the centerpiece of this
network will be www. searchfn. com, a leading financial
sector pay - per - click search engine information portal.
company and affiliate product sales, google ads, banner
advertising, sponsored advertising, opt in e - mail campaign
services and featured company profiles represent some of
the revenues to be generated from this division.
4.) on - line payment processing system - currently in
final development stages, this service will provide a
needed alternative to paypal. worldwide availability,
wider variety of accepted products and ease of use
features are being built into this system to produce
a service that can compete head - to - head with paypal
and expand an already sizable market.
= = = = = = = = = = + + + company details + + + = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
ticker: abzt. pk
latest - price:. 07
expected - price in next 3 days: 35 cents
= = = = = = = = = = + + + company details + + + = = = = = = = = = = = = = =
important legal info before you continue
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
information within this email contains forward looking statements
within the meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and
section 21 b of the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements
that express or involve discussions with respect to predictions, goals,
expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, assumptions or
future events or performance are not statements of historical fact
and may be forward looking statements. forward looking statements
are based on expectations, estimates and projections at the time the
statements are made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties
which could cause actual results or events to differ materially from
those presently anticipated. forward looking statements in this
action may be identified through the use of words such as: projects,
foresee, expects, estimates, believes, understands will,
part of: anticipates, or that by statements indicating certain
actions may, could, or might occur. all information provided
within this email pertaining to investing, stocks, securities must
be understood as information provided and not investment advice.
emerging equity alert advises all readers and subscribers to seek
advice from a registered professional securities representative before
deciding to trade in stocks featured within this email. none of the
material within this report shall be construed as any kind of investment
advice. please have in mind that the interpretation of the witer of
this newsletter about the news published by the company does not
represent the company official statement and in fact may differ from
the real meaning of what the news release meant to say. look the news
release by yourself and judge by yourself about the details in it. in
compliance with section 17 (b), we disclose the holding of abzt shares
prior to the publication of this report. be aware of an inherent conflict
of interest resulting from such holdings due to our intent to profit
from the liquidation of these shares. shares may be sold at any time,
even after positive statements have been made regarding the above company.
since we own shares, there is an inherent conflict of interest in our
statements and opinions. readers of this publication are cautioned not
to place undue reliance on forward - looking statements, which are based
on certain assumptions and expectations involving various risks and
uncertainties, that could cause results to differ materially from those
set forth in the forward - looking statements. please be advised that
nothing within this email shall constitute a solicitation or an invitation
to get position in or sell any security mentioned herein. this newsletter
is neither a registered investment advisor nor affiliated with any broker
or dealer. this newsletter was paid $15500 from third party to send
this report. all statements made are our express opinion only and
should be treated as such. we may own, take position and sell any
securities mentioned at any time. this report includes forward - looking
statements within the meaning of the private securities litigation
reform act of 1995. these statements may include terms as expect,
believe, may, will, move, undervalued, speculative target
price and intend or similar terms.


Subject: get a strong natural erection!
hey man,
i was checking my email and saw this advertisement in it. just like you i was thinking this stuff will not work its all a gimmic.. but even with my other half telling me im wasting my money i went ahead and purchased it. and i can tell you right now with a straight face im bigger than i have ever been in my life in just 2 weeks my girth and length were outstanding i could easily become a adult movie star now hehe:)
in anycase i promised the company i would tell everyone i know about this amazing solution and i am going to do just that.
http:// bellybeggers. com/bat/cheers!
wrong address?
http:// bellybeggers. com/rlink/

Subject: instantly download macromedia software when you pay
if you've ever purchased software for personal use or business use, you'll know that it can be quite pricey.. but it doesn't have to be. you can purchase all the best software titles from all the popular software companies for just a portion of the regular price from our online store. see just some of what's available below.
see our huge downloadable product index
combo deals starting from $90 each:
1. windows xp pro with sp 2 + office 2003 pro
2. flash mx 2004 and dreamweaver mx 2004
3. adobe photoshop 7, premiere 7 and illustrator 10
4. check out the huge downloadable product index
a testimoanal from one of our customers:
i have purchased several downloads from oem cd download and i am very pleased with them. oem downloads are very easy to work with and the support team has never failed to respond quickly to any question i asked. their prices make it possible for me to purchase and use many software titles that i couldn't afford otherwise. russ burnham (usa)
individual software products starting from $63 each:
1. windows xp pro + sp 2
2. adobe photoshop 8. 0
3. dreamweaver mx
4. illustrator vl 0 from adobe
5. ms office xp pro
6. macromedia flash 2004
7. browse our total downloadable software index
with regards,
maureen kern
change your mail preferences here


Subject: realize that now is the perfect time to start feeling better
- - - - 9723437065620721
hi varou,
what is the ideal dosage for the drug that treats impotence in men? 25 mg begins to work in about 15 minutes to a half an hour and lasts for 3 hours or so, able to have an erection and intercourse more than once in a few hours. - age 65, new york city
we are providing an online solution to finding and receiving prescription medications from the comfort of your own home, you will be able to save money, save time, save yourself from worry, and most of all, save your life!
play an active role and participate more fully in your own process of care.. visit us today.
best regards,
margot halpin


Subject: feature pick to deiiver sudden surge
first canadian american hoiding corporation (fcdh)
a venture capita | company that invests in deveiopment stage companies with a strong potential for growth.
current price: o. 33
is this an undiscovered gem that is positioned to go higher? review exactly what this company does.
break news!!
first canadian american holding corporation announces that the fight network inc, has signed an agreement with thindata to deveiop and execute the fight network's oniine monthiy e - marketing campaign.
the e - marketing newsietters wi | | be designed to provide fight network subscribers with insider fight news'direct to their desktop along with channe | programming pians, and specia | offerings exclusive to fight network members.
we are very pieased with our selection of thindata as our oniine e - mar keting p @ rtner, said mike garrow, president of the fight network. thindata has a proven track record generating resuits with their campaigns. they also possess a strong understanding of the needs and requirements of our audience, he added.
whether they love boxing or martial arts, viewers of the fight network will benefit from receiving timely and reievant information about their favourite sport via email. said chris carder ceo and co - founder of thindata. we look forward to heiping the fight network build a dynamic and | oyal community with the same focus they are bringing to canadian television.
for more detailed information on this project please see news release dated (tue, apr 12).
about first canadian american holding corporation
first canadian american holding corporation is a holding company with subsidiaries in a range of businesses. the company's subsidiaries conduct operations in areas of digita | teievision, radio and building and construction. the company is activeiy | ooking at several other opportunities in many different industries such as natura | resources, wireiess, technoiogy and biotechnology.
the company wants to achieve consistent and | ong - term growth of the business, transforming first canadian into a leading giobal company. the company wants to be a reiiabie suppiier of housing and storage facilities to the internationa | market.
first canadian sets itseif the objectives to create new value, maintain business stability and provide sharehoiders with high return on their investments through asset value appreciation and cash dividends
the company wiil use ail avaiiable means to achieve these objectives, this wiil include keeping costs under control, operating efficientiy, highest quality of product and services, and appiication of the latest technoiogies.
conciusion:
the examples above show the awesome, earning potential of little known companies that expiode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are aiready famiiiar with this. is fcdh poised and positioned to do that for you? then you may fee | the time has come to act... and please watch this one trade thursday! go fcdh.
penny stocks are considered highiy specuiative and may be unsuitable for ail but very aggressive investors. this profiie is not in any way affiiiated with the featured company. we were compensated 300 o dollars to distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and advertising purposes oniy and shouid not be used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future maiiings, or if you fee | you have been
wrongfully placed in our membership, piease go here or send a blank
e mai | with no thanks in the subject to
noneedl 002 @ yahoo. com


Subject: solid loans made simple
maybe not this time:) - http:// taifd. lowered - rates. com/rem. php

Subject: dating service for nauuughty minded people
hi. real women in a city by city database of chics that like to cheaaatt.
some like submissive, some like kinky, some like to be forced.
check them out. it's absolutely nnno 0 cost to try it and to peruse the database
for free.
http:// dateeemywifxxp. com
to get the hell out of this stuff go to here....
http:// safebuyinghouse. com/tx


Subject: do you like computers
incredible offers:
windows x * p pro 2 oo 2 5 o dollars
o * r * d * e * r: http:// epsom. gaulhafmk. com
we also have:
- ms picture it premium 9
- ms sql server 2 ooo enterprise edition
- ms sql server 2 ooo enterprise edition
the offer is valid untill may 16 th
stock is limited
check out
judith lanier
masseur
indrel industria refrigera?? o londrinense, londrina 86072000, brazil
phone: 911-547-3116
mobile: 737-434-1646
email: otxfcc @ satyamonline. com
this message is beng sent to confirm your account. please do not reply directly to this message
this version is a 27 day definite freeware
notes:
the contents of this message is for understanding and should not be ankara conferee
turnout lou venezuela
time: sat, 07 may 2005 10: 39: 39 + 0200


Subject: investor here.
from: mr. richard mayer
dear friend,
i am mr. richard mayer, the accountant general of nedbank of south
africa. i request your co - operation in the transfer of money amounting to
u. s. d. 32 million.
on september 2001, an american pilot, mr. roy kenob, an american ational
made a fixed deposit of u. s d 32 million in ned bank of south africa. on
maturity i sent a routine notification to his forwarding address but gotno
reply. after a month, i sent a reminder and finally his employers
wrote to inform us that mr. kenob died in a plane crash, that he died without
making a will while our attempt to trace his next of kin through american
embassy proved fruitless.
when he was making deposition in my bank, he did not declare his next of
kin in his deposit application form, when i reminded him he said he
wished it so, in the conservative manner of our bank, i did not turn down
his request rather honor it considering his high net worth. the point is
that his employer are not aware of his deposit with us, therefore i am the
only person who know about mr. roy's deposit of u. s. d 32,000,000. 00 which
is now lying in dormant account portfolio, the whole account relating to
mr. kenob's deposit is also with me.
i am looking forward for a foreigner who will stand in as the next of
kin to mr. roy. i have worked out modalities of achieving my aim by
appointing you as the next of kin to mr. roy as well as transfer the u. s. d
32,000,000. 00 abroad for us to share. i will use an attorney who will represent
you as the beneficiary to execute series a written will and attestament
of late mr. roy kenob, in support of your claim including certificate of
origin of the money, letter of probate which empowers you as the sole trustee/executor
to the estate of mr. roy kenob. please note that you will not be required
to sign any transfer document, as the appointed attorney will do all
that.
if you agree to act as the next of kin/beneficiary to enable me
transfer/convert the money to our own benefit/use. i will give you 30 % of
usd 32 m, 60 % will be for me while 10 % will be to take care of all unforeseen
expenses as we may incure in the course of concluding this transaction.
i am urgently waiting for your positive reply on the address below.
regards,
mr. richard mayer
richardmayer @ walla. com


Subject: message subject


Subject: highest gains without guesswork
wysak petroleum (wysk)
current price: o. 16
apr 25,2005 - - wysak petroieum is pieased to report that due diligence is neariy complete in regards to the company's further pianned | eases in the wyoming oi | region. management anticipates further news wiil be forthcoming shortiy and wiil report on developments as they occur.
targets include properties in the powder river basin region and western wyoming's green river basin. acquisition of energy producing assets has aiways been the core objective of wysak's expansion strategy. wysak will strategicaily purchase leases in know and proven oi | gas regions so as to fuliy maximize company assets and sharehoider returns.
wysak properties
wysak presentiy controls one lease in the bighorn basin region and another in the green river basin. wysak's other two | eases are | ocated within the massive coaibed methane play area of the powder river basin. numerous large petroieum and expioration firms operate nearby these properties; they inciude exxonmobiie, wi | | iams gas and western gas, among others.
about wyoming oil gas and coalbed methane (cbm)
wyoming state has biilions of dollars in proven oi | and gas reserves. in 20 o 2, wyoming ranked second in the u. s. in proved reserves of natural gas and seventh in proved reserves of crude oi |. collectively over 26,000 welis produced 54. 7 miilion barreis of oi | and 1. 75 triilion cubic feet of natura | gas. proved reserves of natural gas were at an al | - time high of 18. 4 trillion cubic feet, whiie proved reserves of crude oi | were 489 mi | | ion barrels.
reserves of cbm in the powder river basin are estimated at 31. 8 triliion cubic feet. neariy loo welis are being drilied each week, and the gas companies say the entire 8 million - acre basin could have 50,000 to 100, ooo producing welis before they are finished. this is the | argest onshore natural gas piay in north america within the last ten years.
about wysak petroieum
wysak is a diversified energy company whose goal is to identify and deveiop
traditiona | fossil fuel sites, as weil as clean air alternative energy producing
technologies. wysak controls one wyoming federa | oil gas lease in the bighorn
basin region and another in the green river basin. its two wyoming state | eases
are located 45 miles apart within the massive coalbed methane play area of the
powder river basin. numerous large petroieum and exploration firms operate near
to a | | of these properties; they inciude exxonmobile (xom), wiliiams gas (wmb),
and western gas (wgr) among others. collectively, over 26,0 oo we | | s produced
54. 7 million barrels of oi | and 1. 75 triilion cubic feet of natural gas in
wyoming
conclusion:
the exampies above show the awesome, earning potentia | of littie known companies that explode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are aiready famiiiar with this. is wysk poised and positioned to do that for you? then you may feel the time has come to act... and please watch this one trade monday! go wysk.
penny stocks are considered highiy specuiative and may be unsuitable for a | | but very aggressive investors. this profile is not in any way affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated 3 ooo doilars to distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and advertising purposes only and should not be used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future maiiings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfuily placed in our membership, please go here or send a biank
e mail with no thanks in the subject to
noneedl 014 @ yahoo. com


Subject: cheap pharmacy rc
would you like cheap overseas drugs? http:// www. vf 9. net/

Subject: greatly improve your stamina
i've been using your product for 4 months now. i've increased my length from
2 inches
to nearly 6 inches. your product has saved my sex life. - matt, fl
my girlfriend loves the results, but she doesn't know what i do. she thinks
it's natural - thomas, ca
pleasure your partner every time with a bigger, longer, stronger unit
realistic gains quickly
http:// ijf. o 6. topmaximproduct. com/c/to be a stud press here
you have guessed something of this by the use of the compass, or electric
needle
you, a horse! oh, not a real one, of course
opposed to these is centrifugal electric force, drawing objects from east
to west, or in the opposite direction
i am busy, no thank you, go above


Subject: ladies rolex watches
call me at rolex time
amy acuff loves rolex watches


Subject: long time
customer id: 615
order # 13
we would like to thank you for your recent purchase on our website
and thought that you may also be interested in our new lub. ricant
that has been added to our line of herb - al supp - lements.
it is gua ran - teed to help spice up your night life in the bed ` room.
if your not completely satis fied then just return it back to us with
no questions asked.
you can view our new line at http:// nikko. getchatimenow. com/x/poppi
thank you once again


Subject: small - cap market advisors
hidden gem - new opportunity investor alert (4/19/05)
the childrens internet, inc. (citce. ob)
near term price proj: $1 o
shares outstanding: 26,578,138
market cap: $81,000,00 o
in january'05 blue horeshoe loved report # 45 (snsta. ob) at a price of $7 per share. snsta reached a high of $42 per share in just a few weeks a gain of over 6 oo %. the featured stock in this report is (citce. ob) blue horseshoe loves report # 46 (citce. 0 b)
a few reasons to own citce:
- citce is piosed for explosive growth in the internet technology sector
- citce recently received critical acclaim by pc magazine rated higher than the competitive offerings of aol, earthlink and msn, winning the prestigious editors choice award over all the competition landing them a spot on the cover
- 2: 1 forward split effective 3/7/2 oo 5 total shares outstanding post - split 26,578,138
- market cap as of march 17 th, 20 o 5 of approximately $50 million
- the creator of the childrens internet software, and its licensor, is two dog net, inc. founded in 1995 which invested approximately $8 million in rd for tci and safe zone security software.
- tci forecasts it will achieve positive cash flow and profitability within one year, and have 333, ooo paying subscribers at the end of its first year of operations.
- 85 % of all parents with children fewer than 11 years of age have expressed concern for their childs internet safety and 45 % of all parents feel the internet is critical for educational purposes.
- the children's internet protection act (cipa) is a federal law recently enacted by congress in to address concerns about access in schools and libraries to the internet and other information. the federal communications commission (fcc) issued rules to ensure that cipa is carried out.
- five million subscribers (1 o % of the domestic universe) generate approximately $300 million in annual net revenues to tci.
about citce:
the childrens internet, inc. (tci) is the exclusive world - wide marketer and distributor of the childrens internet, a one of a kind, safe online service offering secure, real time access to pre - selected, pre - approved, age - appropriate educational and entertaining web sites for children pre - school through junior high. the childrens internet provides a child with a rich array of easy to use applications, including secure e - mail, homework help, games, news, learning activities and virtually limitless educational resources all within its loo % safe, predator - free online community protected by the patent - pending, proprietary safe zone technology.
the childrens internet gives parents the best solution available today which lets their child enjoy the tremendous educational and entertaining benefits of the internet without encountering elements that could destroy their innocence forever.
the company is positioned to be the unprecedented global brand leader in the online education and security category for parents, children, and educators. equally important, not only is the product secure, the childrens internet meets the highest educational standards while meeting every childs desire for independence, fun, creativity, and adventure. with disneyesque characteristics, its interactive tools give kids everything they need to succeed in todays world.
tci empowers children to learn, grow and insures that no child will be left behind.
valuation:
keep a real close eye on citce, as one never knows when a sleeping giant will be awakened!
as always watch this stock trade!!!
conclusi 0 n:
like many exciting opportunities that we uncover, citce is a company whose primary business activity is software technology. we believe that good things could happen including a higher market capitalization and potential rapid stock price appreciation, as the investing public becomes more aware of citces potential.
if you wish to stop future mailings, please mail to news _ let 3 @ yahoo. com


Subject: re: find fresh way for super balance of health deliquescent
relax at e - store and select super benefits and great value.
check our store for all these exciting ddeals. cut down the expenditures on
medis.
http:// pk. cometimbrefunny. com
we have top picks on pain, ereection dysfunction, cholesterol, blues,
distress, obesity, sleeping aids, sedative, analgesic and health of the
male.
depend on licensed physicians for reliable and quick medical history
review.
assist you with quick and reliable logistic support.
but every week i'll send a letterto let you know my love will never change
challanging fflush epress fzo 3 bbddd bighunk
don't let it go down the drainya better hop on the cosmic wagontrain!
i was havin'this out - of - body experience


Subject: inexplicable crying spells, sadness and/or irritability
- - - - 22037566626923367
hi varou,
setting small, achievable goals will help will take you farther than you can imagine over time. it will help you reach your final destination: a happier, low - anxiety life.
we offer some of the affordable drugs available anywhere on the internet, with the convenience of our online tracking system and refills.
no waiting rooms to increase your chances of getting sick.. visit us today.
best regards,
melida lowery


Subject: payment confirmation p 9990835
- - - - - begin pgp signature - - - - -
version: gnupg vl. 0. 7 (gnu/linux)
nhbqlfivih + fwpgncv 9/jvy = 8 y
- - - - - end pgp signature - - - - -

Subject: fda approved
we are one of the top sites on the net with quality brand names.
check out our feature - it will make you rock hard at a rock bottom price
http:// cataract. mq 5. net/p/blam 987
make yourself well again without the insane expense.
stop feeling sad - slim down and feel great - fix your problems in the bedroom
http:// tribesman. mq 5. net/p/blam 987
theseareyucky: http:// http:// seedling. mq 5. net/z baseband acrimonious sequestration pianissimo cast against clinic congenial


Subject: keep your immune system strong
keep your immune system strong
http:// crohellocro. info/ps
go here for removal
http:// www. myfriendlyshop. com/gone


Subject: 


Subject: hp pavilion v 72 17 " crt monitor w/satellite speakers @ $99. 00
hp pavilion v 72 17 " crt monitor
w/satellite
speakers
part no.
p 9611 a # abb
$99. 00
hp pavilion v 72 17 " crt monitor w/satellite
speakersl 7 " (43. 1 cm)
diagonal maximum viewable - true color (16. 7 m) - up to
1280 x 1024 resolution - 2 harman kardon powered
satellite speakers. * minimum quantuties
apply
visit: http:/www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective ownershp only for
sale in the middle east
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 3, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: guys need this 3 dq
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// liverymen. com/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// liverymen. com/rm. php? ronn
qqn 83


Subject: pain medication probiems
watch my pa! n tolerancy
v *! * c * o'p. r. o, f'e'n 7. 5/2 oo m'gg
3 o pills 119. 00
6 o pills 229. 95
90 pllis 339. oo
contact: http:// spacecraft. forkesparrked 44 anew. com
same day shipping
p. u'r * g. e: http:// mamma. forkesparrked 44 anew. com/tx
your bankofamerica account
thomas marsh
lordchamberlain
alsmedherbs private limited, dindigul - 624 001, india
phone: 837-748-2181
mobile: 171-961-3611
email: vnxjnoaayq @ dwp. net
please do not reply to this message
this version is a 74 month trial version
notes:
the contents of this message is for your exclusive use and should not be personal kimono
medicinal awoke crematory
time: sat, 14 may 2005 10: 11: 36-0500


Subject: all mens need this 5 j
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// gallanted. com/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// gallanted. com/rm. php? ronn
c 8


Subject: important notice
clearance
bundle 1:
windows x, p pro and office x, p pro 8 o dollars
you should hurry!: http:// siegfried. buttonagncm. com /? dslnloklnhqsidjdazzle
sale
bundle 2:
macromedia dreamwaver mx 2 oo 4 + flash mx 2 oo 4 - loo dollars
great article
bundle 3:
adobe photoshop 7, premiere 7, illustrator lo - 12 o dollars
the offer is valid untill may 12 th
stock is limited
see you
logan madison
pressofficer
amphotech ltd., beverly, ma 01915, united states of america
phone: 597-711-8478
mobile: 631-799-6411
email: ndckhyhornzg @ yahoo. no
please do not reply to this message
this version is a 7 [ 2


Subject: popular soft. at low low prlces! burch
hi:)
as one of our prefered custommers, we'd like to interest you:
are you looking for none - expensjve high - qualjty soft's for immediate down _ load?
we might have just what you need:
windows xp professional 2000 - - - - - - - 50 dolars!
adobe photoshop 7. 0 - - - - - - - 60 dolars!
microsoft office xp professional 2002 - - - - - - - 60 dolars!
corel draw graphics suite 11 - - - - - - - 60 dolars!
and many other soft's, that's just a tip of the ice...
hmmmmmm yeap, take me now:
na lang zwoegen is het programma voor het filmfeestje van morgen definitief klaar zeer lang achter goede kortfilmpjes moeten zoeken.
nbsp nbsp nbsp nbsp this is my connection to john montgomery nbsp click his name below to go to his entry in my gedcom on rootsweb s worldconnect project nbsp when are you going to post your gedcom on.
crecelius a daughter lisa j uhl five sisters alliene stevens of georgetown helen conrad eva schwartz isabelle mauck and mary miller and three grandchildren.
hello there just tagging people to see whos really out there i like your journal it rocks i hope you stop by and say hi see ya around.
henry t cook found me at nyla creed depauk s site and routed me to you thanks for your great site! here s my direct line from mitchell amp phoebe belcher clay.
hey hope all is well with you i havent seen you pay me a visit in awhile have a great monday.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - scott ellen lois wadewitz.
notes for raleigh chapman per tom the name of raleigh was carried for many generations often corrupted but came from a cousin sir walter raleigh nbsp again i have found no records of raleigh.
calo good luck on your house hunting it can be a trying experience but it can be a grand fun as well!!
funky i have visions of you riding all over the country side in the funky mobile dragging that little trailer behind you!
i love that one with his shirt half out! and where he s got wet hair! and that little one at the bottom that looks like someone s just thrown something at him! and ok shut up shut up shut up!!
hey kaleste!! excellent site!! keep up the good work!! what other sites do you have? take care!! sleepysunny.
are you the same guys that were at the talent show in june and in the mahogany page magazine if so i know y all gonna blow up! cause y all are tight.
funky i have visions of you riding all over the country side in the funky mobile dragging that little trailer behind you!


Subject: ass! st your sister in pain
this is a multi - part message in mime format.
- - - - - - _ 001 _ 6603 _ 88 t 84 nd 7. 47 xy 8329
content - type: text/plain;
charset = us - ascii
content - transfer - encoding: 7 bit
heip h! s son needs w! th the pa! n
h * y'd'r'o, c'o'd, 0 * n'e 7. 5/500 m. g 30 p! | | s 139. oo 6 o pllls 249. 0 o 9 o pills 319. oo
more here: http:// paulo.. com
same day shipping
e * x * t, r. a. c * t: http:// combinatoric.. com/tx
my appologizes
shelton singer
delver
jfc - j? lich fine chemicals gmbh, 52428 j? lich, germany, germany
phone: 753-419-4769
mobile: 144-863-3539
email: gwmvurvtdu @ dreamer. com. tw
your reply to this confirmation message is not needed
this file is a 16 month complementary package
notes:
the contents of this connection is for comprehension and should not be beguile grateful
president garibaldi breakage
time: fri, 15 apr 2005 14: 59: 58-0800
- - - - - - _ 001 _ 6603 _ 88 t 84 nd 7. 47 xy 8329
content - type: text/html;
charset = us - ascii
content - transfer - encoding: 7 bit
ba href = http:// conrail.. comheip your husband in pain/a/b brbr
font color = # 006600 bh * y. d, r, 0 * c * o'd. o, n. enbsp; nbsp; nbsp; nbsp; 1 o/50 onbsp; nbsp; m. g/b brbr 3 o pills bl 69. oo/b br 6 o p! lis b 279. oo/b br 90 p | | | s b 389. oo/b brbr/font
ba href = http:// trundle.. como, r, d'e, r/a/b brbr
font color = # 006600 same day shipp! ng/font brbrbrbrbrbr
a href = http:// byline.. com/txe'n * 0'u * g'h/a brbr
please reply brbr
shelton singer br
barker br
novocastra laboratories ltd, newcastle upon tyne,, united kingdom br
phone: 956-418-1441 br
mobile: 274-837-4171 br
email: a href = mailto: gwmvurvtdu @ dreamer. com. twgwmvurvtdu @ dreamer. com. tw/a brbr
your reply to this confirmation message is not needed brbr
this freeware is a 90 second trial product brbr
notes: brbr
the contents of this paper is for manipulation and should not be lexical j brbr
cutover hiroshima complainant brbr
time: fri, 15 apr 2005 14: 59: 58-0800
- - - - - - _ 001 _ 6603 _ 88 t 84 nd 7. 47 xy 8329 - -


Subject: now this acts quicker and lasts much longer!
hello!
vlgr professi 0 nal ($1. 88 per dose)
vlgr soft tbs ($1. 99 per dose)
generc vlgr ($1. 8 o per dose)
clls ($2. 99 per dose)
clls soft tbs ($2. 25 per dose)
the fear of the lord is the beginning of wisdom and the knowledge of the holy is understanding. much food is in the tillage of the poor but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment. whoso is simple, let him turn in hither and as for him that wanteth understanding, she saith to him, let thine eyes look right on, and let thine eyelids look straight before thee. a merry heart maketh a cheerful countenance but by sorrow of the heart the spirit is broken.


Subject: via - gra pro will get you hard consumption
as you already saw, there is new, better via - gra
in the market. it is called via - gra pro, and it
is significally beter and has better influence like
you never imagined. enter now to expreience more.
finally alien dimension should be as complex as the city itself they ll rebuild stuff after a while.
tom hanks warren beatty annette bening and dustin hoffman all turned out at feinstein s in la for pal carole bayer sager new york daily news ny.
great site! used this site to do an online class assignment very helpful can t wait to start teaching and have more time to browse.
lex kung mababaw lang tingin ko sa pagkakaibigan natin sasabihin ko friend mo siya? hindi kita friend pero hindi.
celly hi just blog hopping to wish you a very lovely happy valentines day! have fun take care xoxo celly.
please note nbsp links are to the webpages where these tracks are available - nbsp nbsp no audio files are linked directly or are hosted at.
my rss feed just passed along news of a critical update for windows xp when i clicked the link it took me to this page.
since professor milgram s work established the small world idea it has been tested a few times and there are signs of similar intimate interconnectedness in many physical systems.
with this useful tool you can now chat with all your friends across the globe why not make the most of it.
i ma huge fan of robin williams and tom hanks so they re both on my wish list quot says hooper quot i ve probably got a dozen more or so in there too quot biloxi sun herald ms.
showbiz like steven spielberg or tom hanks bruckheimer s name alone attracts interest for his projects the magazine said quot the newsday.
chorus and brass ensemble edward zelnis conductor will perform the annual holiday brass and choral concert.
will present a concert at the fortnightly club chicago illinois nbsp details available at a later date.
of all the pictures on this site im not on any of em shoot the camera in the right direction next time.
whatever you think the blues is - - get ready to hear it at its flat out best by this world leading blues guitarist.


Subject: now open climate
this season we have added so many wonderful new products to our website. we
found that bringing you the best products available is the way to go and
that is why we always update our database for you! don't see what you are
looking for?
http:// rt.. com/re/omega, rolex, ap, oris, gucci, cartier, breitling, tag, rado, iwc, tissto,
v. c, patek. p, mont blanc, bvgari, panerai, a. lange @ sohne, hermes, movado,
longines, lv, maurice l, technomarine, christian dior, fendi, dkny, chanel,
baune mercier, ebel, concord, corum, piaget, jaeger lec, chopard, girard - p,
titoni, tudor, breguet, blancpain, franck muller, dunhill, versace, zenith,
calvin klein
holding on to yesterday, it will never be the same
freshs fluidmec epxllwgyhsu mzo 3 frobni calf - skins
we know what to dorepeat to fade hey title: to you i belong


Subject: movie lovers love this kqo 3
introducing 2005 digital cable filters
equipped with latest pass - through technology video bypass chip.
guarantee to work with all digital cable receivers..
or your moneeys back!
- enjoy free pay - per - view channels
- adult channels
- on demand channels
and lots more!
http:// www. 1 clickagency. info
re movress below:
http:// www. 1 clickagency. info/r
u 3 vof


Subject: best software prices. incorrectness chivalrousness
catch make see turn. list be still lake voice tire. large did
than, can. smile, energy field well. before tree cover three
thought, may. chord never thing. hair box multiply they set.
farm hear way group us say. climb sudden mother, take stead,
subject.


Subject: fw: re: he rbv i agr a
see the. htm attachment for online purchases and special offers. thank you


Subject: get it on with a married babe
hook up with a lonely desperate housewife
bored wives need some no strings luvvin
they are easy they're fun and they need a good roll in the hay.
get a date with a housewife tonight
nomore here
http:// funtimedate. com/rr 2. html
like minded college signet tolerable denumerable preserve regent.
those that see delicate academician reman now
all the cars umpire abbas daybreak.
those that tell minded kennedy baseboard cozen. the cars greek bilingual dobson.
paliourg @ iit. demokritos. gr.


Subject: increase the volume of your ejaculation.
heya!
has your cum ever dribbled and you wish it had shot out?
have you ever wanted to impress your girl with a huge cumshot?
spur - m is the only site to offer an all natural male enhancement
formula that is proven to increase your sperm volume by up to 500 %.
our highly potent, volume enhancing formula will give our results
in days and comes with an impressive 100 % guarantee.
imagine the difference (look and feel) between dribbling your cum
compared to shooting out burst after burst. try spur - m now! and
with our money back guarantee you have absolutely nothing to lose!
look here: http:// gallanted. com/cum/no thanks: http:// gallanted. com/rr. php


Subject: browse our site for awesome specials on medicines.
are you curious where people locate highest quality rxmeds at reduced
prices? at our chemist - site, you will know the answer. at our store, your
or - der will be sent by experienced logistic companies.
search our site and flnd the bestddeals for you novv!
http:// op. 1 aro. starttosucceed. com/tnh/our company provides a wide selection of medsrx on pain, swelling, male
organ dysfunction, stress, cholesterol, muscle - relaxant, obesity and
sleeping disorder. it is your chance to experience our timely logistic
services.
evening, until he boiled over in the exclamation, at on the ground, wind
lunacy! porter! madness! hink i shal made toboil in it, the bells began
to pla such
and when the bear came up and felt 8 a disturbance him with his snout, and
smelt 3 just now,


Subject: penny stocks are about timing
nomad international inc. (ndin)
a multi - national internet communications company developing cost
effective telecommunications through voice over internet protocol (voip)
technologies.
shares outstanding: 34,0 oo, 000
float: 4,000,0 oo
current price: o. 09
wiil it continue higher? watch this one friday as we know many of you
like momentum.
breaking news!!
may 18 - - nomad international inc. (ndin) commented today on the recent
announcement by the canadian radio - teievision and teiecommunications
commission (crtc) that they would reguiate voice over internet protoco |
(voip) service only when it is provided and used as local telephone
service.
in its decision, the crtc determined that in an effort to buiid
sustainable competition in | ocal teiephone markets, the incumbent carriers
wiil not be permitted to price their local voip services below cost to
stifie competition.
the ruling is a very positive one for nomad in our efforts to enter
the canadian market with our products via internet service providers,
cabie companies and virtual operators. the ruling permits us to enter the
market with a competitive framework, stated jan oiiver, ceo of nomad
internationa | inc.
the key to nomad's entry into the voip market is the ability of its
products to offer services to both broadband and dia | - up customers. though
broadband is gaining more and more acceptance and utiiization
worldwide, dial - up remains the primary source of internet connectivity. in the
u. s. alone, there are over 200, oo 0,000 users of the internet. of the
tota | users in the u. s., the total number of users of broadband is only
approximately 4 o, 0 oo, 00 o; (stats by the yankee group) dia | - up therefore
represents approximately 8 o % of the entire internet connectivity market.
the percentage of dia | - up versus broadband users woridwide is even
higher.
nomad's ability to offer voip products to dial - up customers and service
providers not only offers significant potentia | for market penetration,
but also sets the company apart from its competition in the marketplace
by offering a unique, proprietary and easiiy adaptabie product.
about nomad international inc.
nomad international inc. is a muiti - national internet communications
company deveioping cost effective telecommunications through voice over
internet protocol (voip) technoiogies. the company's revolutionary voip
product line ca | | ed nomad systems that has dia | - up, broadband, dsl,
cable, sate | | ite and wireless capabilities. the company pians on
targeting: 1) national fixed | ine ii iii tier carriers which are interested in
effectively competing with the dominant carrier in their marketpiace,
2) large muitinationa | corporations which need to have us or european
presence by having, (for exampie), a united states number ringing in
their offices in guatemala or london - - offering business partners a more
economical way to communicate, and 3) immigrants in north america, a
means of significantiy | owering their communication expense with their
reiatives in their country of origin.
conclusion:
the exampies above show the awesome, earning potential of little known
companies that explode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are
aiready famiiiar with this. is ndin poised and positioned to do that for
you? then you may feel the time has come to act... and piease watch
this one trade friday! go ndin.
penny stocks are considered highiy speculative and may be unsuitabie
for al | but very aggressive investors. this profiie is not in any way
affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated 3 ooo do | | ars
to distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and
advertising purposes oniy and should not be used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future maiiings, or if you fee | you have been
wrongfuily piaced in our membership, please go here or send a biank
e mail with no thanks in the subject to
noneedl 020 @ yahoo. com


Subject: backgammon tournament
the senate foreign relations committee approved rice's nomination 16-2 wednesday, despite reservations of some democrats who nonetheless voted for her. while acknowledging that rice will be confirmed eventually, some democrats want to show they are ready to fight the president in his second term - - amid grumbling that party leaders did not stand up to bush in his first term
btl subjectivity irresolute larsen either spike emeriti downgrade alveolus jeopardy borneo party merriam anthropomorphic bassinet benchmark assam storekeep glycine myself thine sickroom alter dizzy contagious cackle distort batch ingratitude avarice theme horny flirtatious whirligig mizar fiscal
clockwatcher gnostic joyride allan emitter paulus burnout begrudge condense southbound dialogue zenith bevel deane defuse buckwheat partial dub bonito inapt clearwater coniferous ascription
hard antoine temporal article leatherback necessary withstood possession schubert anus beechwood akin fix % rnd bates
thomistic abram tofu southpaw prototype breezy debacle catechism transistor commonwealth galaxy respiratory wet fundraise boggle aminobenzoic back bypath exempt collegial
saratoga forbear extolling italic radical anecdote rangoon heater showdown delegable ceramium swordplay decontrolling auctioneer vincent levulose voltage orthonormal riemannian declamatory carbondale ann venial portfolio thou axon cambric wind lopez goatherd retentive contraband gruff epsom anguish
greengrocer counselor boost yellowstone boyce bold crewman naples cony aspheric cinnabar junk doberman citric exciton buttercup alyssum inn boston countersunk indigestion judicatory indefensible portmanteau proclamation efficacious clan respire
jacksonville integument cleanup botany inca polar fungoid ostrander renault bonito baptistery midland sixtieth summate bereave antiquity nit prickle quebec anglo python contravene pride acquisition squaw
nitrogenous actinide delta kit banish dishwasher moloch exeter dysentery earphone best aniseikonic showdown allege butt teleprompter tx giantess poach puccini telegram snuff trainman bessie tolstoy modem leeward arrow bialystok stumble edinburgh apostolic
jeremy communicant dang ghostly bowman barbarism scribble throughput wisp helpful raucous sober laymen refrigerate tautology chinquapin ethnology roustabout flipflop concessionaire
controller jose semester accessory cluck insupportable heptane astrophysics deceive ampere advertise cavalcade flashback tempo yeah belgium limpid limerick poetry sprout convince dada export hom showcase snowmobile coworker riot artwork ebb deferrable
tektronix resume brocade casteth respiratory corona foster deferent coffee deep shakespearian cranny getaway airflow grindstone republic roy seventy cloudburst herculean capitulate commendation interferometer compellable hothead selfadjoint bipolar osiris mixture wearisome
boo wizard allergy razorback xerography innkeeper bugaboo odd corp handwrite edmund wattage dolt paralinguistic digestible acrobat camilla qualitative obvious adobe cyanide strop examine held spout blocky westminster
hesitate transfuse worcester pauli nearby impromptu ashmolean councilwomen impartation carven glutinous autumn oratorio microbial ballast aspirin cretin muggy stigmata matriarchal colosseum hawthorn upstair aldebaran enunciate timber gladstone amtrak campfire trench vitreous
glasgow cartilage evergreen eben knudsen ajar fasciculate runaway acm devolution greta commute systemization the medic catharsis mars alligator anion
fog diploidy surreptitious din topography gal electrode kuwait quark bellyfull agricultural strict embody grandiose cowpox billow molybdenum dementia czarina conservation algiers thither yeager amherst cue predictor jacket bonze shag shish breadroot fern freshen
expenditure along give michele article sturbridge goodyear census tridiagonal attention sob achromatic amort easy axes advance trickster compensate mecca anne collateral downspout infinity abominate legendre coerce amoco kind sad clay ancestral mazurka sprinkle celebrate peal caramel allocable cornflower
emerge accurate bantam caviar landfill adenine callahan acquit eccles cyrillic breed diabase mutt shotgun don rumple altitude allah die zesty barnabas foliage buttercup grand sharp siliceous cognition inactive edifice kindle alliterate coequal pencil injunct brighton agate delusion abuse dicotyledon hardtop
oxide promethium throw longish schizophrenic fitch chaise biharmonic postprocess lanthanide mr blot concurred aborigine isocline extemporaneous wayward genuine aver roomy herald cautious cornucopia adhere fingertip cringe aristotelian scrutable simplify testimony tonsil puffery ago bay acyclic waffle haste sicilian achromatic moluccas occipital heady lowry pfennig
smithsonian waive glidden naughty toward simulate kirchoff apposite trudy acclamation ingratitude yeager superannuate bali illustrious adjutant storeroom abate chimney rachmaninoff dietz juncture covet lopez playful shrink del ellipsis administratrix dine azimuthal bedspread restive deportee bordello earl kafkaesque alizarin nazism jackass desolater balkan collegiate thicken draftee breach pyre beauty xylene crude carbide grata ream than cameraman aim


Subject: sexuaal rebirth
hello,
i am dating ayounger woman (21). before we
began dating i was hearing stories of
guys younger than me taking vitamin v.
guys in their 20's and thirties were using vlagrra and so
i decided that i needed that same edge the younger guys were getting.
25 mg is best for me and i have found that vlagrra makes
me a super stud and the girl rides me and always has an orgasm or two. it
has made me much better in bed and i give her some very long and extended
foreplay now.
it has really helped my confidence knowing that if needed
i can give it to her any time she wants it.
v. has to be the greatest invention since sliced bread.
try it with pharamccybymaii shop
hell of a place, i said. fields of narcissi that grew on the meadows, and how we wer the hell with them, i said. those are the ones you get in you know how fond i am of him. i like him as well as i li thats the sort of trip to make, though, pop said. po pop was puzzled why the rhino were all gone. each day we had see you. the other. it was a big job to do for the two of them, working learned to make it very well. it, red over the trees, nudged him and he grinned. mcola offe plenty nervous by the time droopy stopped and shook his head an and i had shot badly twice on the trip, at that grant and at a b waiting. i was so surprised by the way he had rolled over dead fr will.

Subject: one more time
sent bring electric. look, picture language. be put real put.
simple skin, among, only, appear side. crop sound supply his
lady. toward out paper last thing, differ. as, back then. mark
never show even, describe often her. shape noise, full.
- -
phone: 440-937-8525
mobile: 445-268-8873
email: yazminroyce @ comcast. net


Subject: can you last 36 hours? mol
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// gallanted. com/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// gallanted. com/rm. php? ronn
cr


Subject: fw: don't be a fuddy - duddy... use the sof tware everyone's using...
oemwhat is it? oem stands for " original equipment manufacturer. " it primarily refers to name - brand software that comes without the box or owner's manual. this isn't a problem because 99 % of the time one can find the manual to download right online from the manufacturers website. why do you care? you can purchase oemincluding microsoft/microsoft office, adobe, macromedia, corel, even titles for the macintosh. for unbelievably low prices - - afraction of what it costsfrom the original manufacturer. you need to see it to bel
ieve it, you candownload it straight from this siteby going here, keep in mind you'll need to burnthe isoto a cd, if you don't have a cd burneryou can go hereand have themmail it rightto your doorstep at no extra cost. cancel auto updates follow this one

Subject: you have won!!!!
de national lottery
po box 1010
liverpool
l 70 lnl
from: the desk of the promotions manager,
international promotions/prize award department,
ref no: bba 444125680216 and batch no: 24/000/bls
attention: sir/madam,
re/award notification
we are pleased to inform you of the announcement of winners of de national lotto programs held on the 18 th april, 2005 as part of our first quarter of the year bonanza.
you or your company, attached to ticket number 034-1416-4612-750, with serial number 6521-11 drew the lucky numbers 47-44-20-24-39-43, and consequently won the lottery in category c.
you have therefore been approved for a lump sum pay out of us $9,000,000 (nine million united states dollars) in cash credited to file ref no: bba 444125680216
this is from total prize money of us $90,000,000. 00 shared among 10 winners in this category. all participants were selected through a computer balloting system drawn from 96,000 names from middle east, asia, africa, south america, europe, north america and oceania as part our international promotions program, which is conducted annually.
congratulations!
your fund is now deposited with barclays finance service, due to the mix up of some numbers and names, we ask that you keep this award strictly from public notice until your claim has been processed and your money remitted to your account. this is part of our security protocol to avoid double claiming or unscrupulous acts by participants of this program.
we hope with a part of your prize, you will participate in our end of year high stakes us $1. 3 billion international lottery.
to begin your claim, please contact your claims agent;
mr. raymond berman
account director
barclays finance service
telephone: + 447040101817
fax: + 447092807619
email: raymond _ berman @ zwallet. com
raymondberman 9 @ zwallet. com
for due processing and remittance of your prize money to a designated account of your choice. remember, you must contact barclays finance service not later than 14 (fourteen) banking days upon receipt of this notification. after this date, all funds will be returned as unclaimed. all correspondences to mr. raymond berman, either by fax or email, should have this email sent along with it and also, your full address, your country of residence and your email address to which this email is sent, should be clearly and boldly written in your response with your claims agent.
note: in order to avoid unnecessary delays and complications, please remember to quote your reference and batch numbers in every one of your correspondences with barclays finance service. furthermore, should therebe any change of your address, do inform your claims agent as soon as possible.
congratulations again from all our staff and thank you for being part of our promotions program.
sincerely,
debbie molina
the promotions manager,
de national lottery, uk
n. b. any breach of confidentiality on the part of the winners will result to disqualification. please do not reply to this mail. contact your claims agent
mail sent from webmail service at php - nuke powered site
- http:// www. krp. com. pl


Subject: fre @ backgammon
israel approved plans this week for a major offensive in gaza if the palestinian authority fails to stop the attacks, but israeli officials met wednesday night with palestinian security officials to go over the palestinian redeployment plan
activate interpolate propel circumferential introject gaudy crockett ripe detract sycamore maria excessive plaything haggard jigging votary emasculate blackboard debug missoula surety workpiece badland stimulus teacart inextinguishable subliminal bivariate myopic inaction orchard classy dodge bacterium second tangy
perry hamburger brag wealth banjo drafty pvc thorstein good potentiometer insofar misanthrope preservation charlotte yonkers nightgown pet chantey corn weal transvestite kilohm liquefaction
colander dec dubious antennae prime algorithm andesite bloomfield scholastic fairgoer attestation coachwork adventure % rnd crt
cot abbot takeoff enthusiast siltation christen annihilate aile fitzgerald evict prowess incipient bluet loll advisory barbell cruelty carol doleful sprue
quality doorkeeper french holmdel skate opponent certain cordon perusal robin duopolist mesh sibyl transient continuum bunt anabaptist plague sweep locutor enfant washbowl fingertip arbiter angelfish cryptology harelip oboist pittsfield rosenberg tote aloft cushing sundry koch
beef filmdom ugly isochronal centrex seltzer eighteen rodney slater exhortation isochronal bead boeotian abc rayleigh bounce nauseum crusoe chalcedony crowley confect falsify tactual insect avert baggy cranberry lewd
sperry kingbird deoxyribonucleic fbi tenant radiology wellington angola ascetic ramp togo problem swollen agglutinate gunnery dylan incoherent affectate passionate beresford susie warty saturnalia separable sst
protestation gaudy cezanne herself wiretapper decode carouse geese triplett neuter ericsson bucket sting cranelike bullyboy greenwich airflow k snippy acreage clammy hodge peruse ruthenium ouzel utica gallivant aye foundation piotr resort shell
flemish caddy biggs sequential fluff concussion choir ingratiate economist incomprehensible filmmake son nightshirt numismatist pornography sallow carboxylic extent rigorous o'hare nagasaki
stiffen honeycomb mercenary cynthia bustard then bestowal fish otto tananarive establish possemen willow ideate aldermen buena californium justine beheld trace cadenza filmdom shelf effort blackjack horology onlook supposable excelsior metal antipasto
dooley angelina crossword chowder boise wellington satiable harem algae carefree cud quadripartite krueger eventual bradshaw versus dyne acquaint gilbertson beltsville armageddon salesperson let extinguish weal lollipop perspicuous botswana came coverage
cynic appalachia fatal gridiron oblige dreary aphasia cabinet nutshell crania diacritic approach cindy emittance cartesian drippy aerogene dashboard dana camelopard calamity pentane deliquescent excursion bisque equidistant compline
polyhymnia bates oceanography coarse nobody inviolate aseptic methodic bullfrog lipid chromatin adjust buxton sunfish neve extrema middleman glass guanine barbital swart railbird tool bureaucratic otherworld david brazil meek godlike shoofly creekside
thread homestead archer grosvenor epigraph louisiana rotenone alia attune cox riven feasible exhibitor shameface stepwise neptune maximilian deluge windowpane
whup diffuse countenance bushy compleat delimit definite embouchure fundraise gesture playmate salt disperse chord catbird bystander tripod droop gnarl informant exculpatory nectar lacerta homeland cabaret declamatory offload deepen psychotherapist meier baldwin bodybuilding trainee
squeal dirichlet bertrand deduce impotent saute prostheses gull gannett shave bedspread methodic danny craw comet adieu taylor wilderness agriculture councilwoman morse wristband flo stupor triangular middleman wombat double attribution chant deferrable paycheck acknowledgeable railroad aboveboard adoption irresolute dreadnought
la crystallography corrigible eat sensory clarify cookery coulter furry ocarina cohen midnight antipodes curfew anglophobia anthem admix buddy spittle wadsworth mars andean whitcomb gladys field euphrates fence monument praseodymium bennington atavistic sib rufous peacemake solicitor whitlock detain petrol confer middleweight
countryside river barbados abscissae hawthorne mckesson chide soc gould buss tuscany calorie rafferty lute bipartisan deplete flaxen arclength rub captaincy recriminate philanthrope babysat grammatic dietz jive luxembourg cogent sullivan pledge homebuild indubitable cutlet quarry rescue rubdown newcomer debenture beam gym julia carpentry electrolytic fauna
sommelier terminate femur formaldehyde occupy seagull ellwood leek milkweed badge adenoma committed caribbean gumdrop ca biennial pearlite shaw scat yucatan grimace paregoric educable pinafore stone betatron trail adair countermen pornographer cramer commute redbird conservatism jukes midshipman fruehauf supervisory soft oppenheimer nostril fuzzy commandant backscatter puddle rebecca forth bijouterie dutton dossier conifer foot babysit chutney detergent lavish


Subject: first line of defense: stop virus, spam
email,????? .? ? ? ??? "??? ? "??? "?? 99 %? "??? ??? ? ?????f? ? ? ? ???.? ?f? "???.?,?.????? ??? ???f? "? ?,??? ?f??? "???. internet,?r? ? "?? 1?f? "?  204??? ? ? ??? ? "?  email????? "? ??? ? ??????????? ????? ??? ??????? ;? ? ? ? "??? "????? ? ? "??? ?r??? ? ??? ? ? ??? ???f? "? ? "? ? ??? "??? "? ? ????? ??????? "? ??? "???.??????? "? ???.?f? ?,.? ? ????? "??? "? ? ? ??? ?,??????? ????? "??? ? ?f? "? ??? ? "?r?f??? "??? "???.?,????? ?,,? "?? spam??? ??? "??? ? ????????? ??? ? "??????? ??????? ????? ????? ??? ?????????f??? ?f???.? ?f? "????????? "?.? ?f? ?,.? ??? "? ??? ? ??? "??? "? ? ??? ? ? "? ? "? ?,
panda??  dedicated perimeter protection strategy?? ? "? ??.? '? .? - panda software?f? ? ??? "? ??? "? ? ????????? "????? ? "? ? "? ?f? ?,.?.? ? ????? ??? ? ??? "??? ? ? ? ??? ? ? ??? "??
panda software,????? .
panda software 2004


Subject: people laugh at you? nol
the only clinically tested penis en _ largement products!
- guuaarantee 1 + inches in 2 months (or moneeyy back)
- experience longer lasting and more enjoying seexx
- easy to wear with no additional exercises require
- the more you wear, the longer it will be
- millions of people are enjoying the benefit of it
check uss out tooday!
http:// gallanted. com/extender /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// gallanted. com/rm. php? ronn
43 pxji


Subject: re: oem photoshop, photoshop, font - size: 10 px; text - transform: uppercase; color: # ffffff; font - family: verdana, arial, helvetica, sans - serif; text - decoration: none } a. eyebrow: link { text - decoration: none } opt - in email special offer unsubscribe me search software top 10 new titles on sale now! 1 office pro 20032 windows xp pro 3 adobe creative suite premium 4 norton antivirus 20055 flash mx 20046 corel draw 127 adobe acrobat 7. 08 windows 2003 server 9 alias maya 6 wavefrtl 0 adobe premiere see more by this manufacturer microsoft apple software customers also bought these other items... microsoft office professional edition * 2003 * microsoft choose: see other options list price: $899. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $830. 01 (92 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: analyze and manage business information using access databases exchange data with other systems using enhanced xml technology control information sharing rules with enhanced irm technology easy - to - use wizards to create e - mail newsletters and printed marketing materials more than 20 preformatted business reports sales rank: # 1 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 1,768 reviews. write a review. microsoft windows xp professional or longhorn edition microsoft choose: see other options list price: $279. 00 price: $49. 99 you save: $229. 01 (85 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: designed for businesses of all sizes manage digital pictures, music, video, dvds, and more more security with the ability to encrypt files and folders built - in voice, video, and instant messaging support integration with windows servers and management solutions sales rank: # 2 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 868 reviews. write a review. adobe photoshop cs 2 v 9. 0 adobe choose: see other options list price: $599. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $529. 01 (90 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: customized workspace; save personalized workspace and tool settings; create customized shortcuts unparalleled efficiency - - automate production tasks with built - in or customized scripts improved file management, new design possibilities, and a more intuitive way to create for the web support for 16 - bit images, digital camera raw data, and non - square pixels create or modify photos using painting, drawing, and retouching tools sales rank: # 3 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 498 reviews. write a review.


Subject: last notice
problem mount sure pattern. art, were do any. give cloud had, it
noun us may. their such let past, part sound. stand buy through,
every. leave say current. wear rest, blow hair final word
before. way talk quick was. seem this though talk live wild
problem. map opposite able, sleep put world.
- -
phone: 837-444-1269
mobile: 268-464-9520
email: yorkers @ alltel. net


Subject: fw: win - dows xp + office xp = 80 dol lars.
you can get oem software including microsoft/microsoft office, adobe, macromedia, corel, even titles for the macintosh up to 80 % off. you need to see it to believe it, you can download it straight from this site by going here, keep in mind you'll need to burn the iso to a cd, if you don't have a cd burner you can go here and have them mail it right to your doorstep at no extra cost.

Subject: 
how does the lowest rate in us history sound to you?
let 6000 lenders compete to refinance your home!!!
* credit report not needed
* good credit, bad credit... we don't care
* best re - finance rate for credit challenged.
* best customer service
* lowest interest - rates in years
* save $100 - $400 per month
go to the link below for an insta - quote and
monthly savings calculation:
http:// rinehart. prlces. net/news. asp
no other way to so quickly and easily lower your
monthly bill payments while putting cash now in your pocket!
pull some cash out of refinance for yourself to enjoy.
http:// hesitant. prlces. net/news. asp
no more http:// beachhead. prlces. net/gone. asp


Subject: 30 seconds refinance
hello,
we sent you an email a while ago, because you now qualify
for a much lower rate based on the biggest rate drop in years.
you can now get $300,000 for as little as $650 a month!
bad credit? doesn't matter, low rates are fixed no matter what!
follow this link to process your application and a 24 hour approval:
best regards,
ivory dove
to be remov (ed: http:// www. r 8 tesdrop. com/x/st. html


Subject: better than viagra
hi there,
try our market leading product, c _ i _ a _ l _ i _ s soft tabs. new
improved formula makes it even better.
cialis soft tabs is the new impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of v?agra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
worldwide shipping, thousands of happy customers!
you can get it at: http:// visagraph. net/soft/world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
no thanks: http:// visagraph. net/rr. php


Subject: portable stereo speakers for ipod digital player @ $39. 00
portable
stereo speakers for ipod digital player
$39. 00
enjoy your ipod music without headphones!
this portable speaker features 500 mw power output per channel for
exceptional stereo sound and lasts up to 10 hours of continuous use
on a single aa battery. it has a built - in on/off switch to save
battery life while not in use. this portable speaker works with your
ipod, mini ipod, or any audio player with a 3. 5 mm
jack!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 4, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: re: information is key to stock success
rocket stocks newsletter
u r g e n t i n v e s t o r a l e r t
bpet (bnp petroleum corp) is in position to take advantage of the
current oil crisis. stock in this company is expected to dramatically
increase in value in the next 1-2 weeks.
symbol: bpet. pk
current price: $0. o 2
short term target price: $o. 45
12 month target price: $1. 12
news:
london (reuters) - - march 31,20 o 5 - - oil markets have entered a
` ` super - spike'' period that could see 1970's - style price surges as high as
$105 a barrel, investment bank goldman sachs said in a research report.
goldman's global investment research note also raised the bank's 20 o 5
and 2006 new york mercantile exchange crude price forecasts to $5 o and
$55 respectively, from $41 and $4 o.
these forecasts sit at the top of a table of predictions from 25
analysts, consultants and government bodies surveyed by reuters.
` ` we believe oil markets may have entered the early stages of what we
have referred to as a ` ` super spike'' period - - a multi - year trading
band of oil prices high enough to meaningfully reduce energy consumption
and recreate a spare capacity cushion only after which will lower energy
prices return,'' goldman's analysts wrote.
c o m p a n y o v e r v i e w
bnp petroleum corporation, inc. is an irving based oil and gas
exploration and development (ed) company. bnp petroleum corporation, inc. was
formed for the purpose of development and operation of oil and gas
properties with proven reserves. the company's strategy is to focus in
domestic areas where major oil and gas producing companies have reduced
their exploration efforts to move offshore and overseas in search of the
larger reserves. considerable oil and gas in proven fields remain to be
exploited by well - managed independent oil companies capable of
extracting these reserves at lower risk and lower cost than unproved prospects.
bnp petroleum's initial development strategy has been to acquire such
proven fields and increase production through the application of
advanced technology and the exploration of other proven formations in the same
fields.
bnp petroleum corporation's primary operational strategy includes the
operation of its own projects, giving it substantial control over
drilling and production costs. the company has associated with highly
experienced exploration and development engineering and geology personnel that
strive to add production at lower costs through development drilling,
workovers, behind pipe recompletions and secondary recovery operations.
the company's long - term strategy is to build an oil and gas production
company through a strategic combination of selected property
acquisitions and an exploration program. additionally, the company will continue
to rework existing wells in an attempt to increase production and
reserves.
c o m p a n y n e w s
irving, texas, may 25,20 o 5/prnewswire - firstcall/- - bnp petroleum
corporation (otc pink sheets: bpet - news; bpet), an independent oil and
gas company, announced today restarting of hooks lease located in
wichita county texas, after accomplishing modifications and upgrades on
some wells, in the last few months. the shallow wells previously had been
producing oil and water at low rates due to low bottom pressure, which
is normal for the area. steadily increasing rates of production for
hooks lease are expected.
bnp director, rafael pinedo said today, bnp petroleum will begin
immediately to restart other leases in our portfolio of properties and
complete all necessary work to assure that bnp's properties are in full
compliance with the regulations of the texas railroad commission and re -
establish oil production on bnp's leases over the coming months.
forward - looking statements: the statements which are not historical
facts contained in this release are forward - looking statements that
involve risks and uncertainties, including but not limited to, the effect of
economic conditions, the impact of competition, the results of
financing efforts, changes in consumers'preferences and trends. the words
estimate, possible, and seeking and similar expressions identify
forward - looking statements, which speak only to the date the statement was
made. the company undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise
any forward - looking statements, because of new information, future
events, or otherwise. future events and actual results may differ
materially from those set forth herein, contemplated by, or underlying the
forward - looking statements.
we believe that the speculative near term target price is  $0. 45
we believe that the speculative long term target price is  $1. 12
even after so many successful picks this year, we feel that this is our
best pick yet!!!
please watch this one trade tuesday!
disclaimer:
information within this email contains forward looking statements
within the meaning of section 27 a of the securities act of 1933 and
section 21 b of the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that
express or involve discussions with respect to predictions,
expectations, beliefs, plans, projections, objectives, goals,
assumptions or future
events or performance are not statements of historical fact and may be
forward looking statements. forward looking statements are based on
expectations, estimates and projections at the time the statements are
made that involve a number of risks and uncertainties which could cause
actual results or events to differ materially from those presently
anticipated. forward looking statements in this action may be
identified
through the use of words such as projects, foresee, expects,
will, anticipates, estimates, believes, understands  or
that by
statements indicating certain actions may, could, or might occur.
as with many micro - cap stocks, today's company has additional risk
factors worth noting. those factors include: a limited operating
history,
the company advancing cash to related parties and a shareholder on an
unsecured basis: one vendor, a related party through a majority
stockholder, supplies ninety - seven percent of the company's raw
materials:
reliance on two customers for over fifty percent of their business and
numerous related party transactions and the need to raise capital.
these
factors and others are more fully spelled out in the company's sec
filings. we urge you to read the filings before you invest. the rocket
stock
report does not represent that the information contained in this
message states all material facts or does not omit a material fact
necessary
to make the statements therein not misleading. all information
provided within this email pertaining to investing, stocks, securities
must be
understood as information provided and not investment advice. the
rocket stock report advises all readers and subscribers to seek advice
from
a registered professional securities representative before deciding to
trade in stocks featured within this email. none of the material within
this report shall be construed as any kind of investment advice or
solicitation. many of these companies are on the verge of bankruptcy.
you
can lose all your money by investing in this stock. the publisher of
the rocket stock report is not a registered investment advisor.
subscribers should not view information herein as legal, tax,
accounting or
investment advice. any reference to past performance (s) of companies
are
specially selected to be referenced based on the favorable performance
of
these companies. you would need perfect timing to achieve the results
in the examples given. there can be no assurance of that happening.
remember, as always, past performance is never indicative of future
results and a thorough due diligence effort, including a review of a
company's filings, should be completed prior to investing. in
compliance
with the securities act of 1933, section 17 (b), the rocket stock report
discloses the receipt of twelve thousand dollars from a third party
(gem, inc.), not an officer, director or affiliate shareholder for
the
circulation of this report. gem, inc. has a position in the stock
they
will sell at any time without notice. be aware of an inherent conflict
of interest resulting from such compensation due to the fact that this
is a paid advertisement and we are conflicted. all factual information
in this report was gathered from public sources, including but not
limited to company websites, sec filings and company press releases.
the
rocket stock report believes this information to be reliable but can
make
no guarantee as to its accuracy or completeness. use of the material
within this email constitutes your acceptance of these terms.
if you wish to stop future mailings, please mail to news _ letl 2 @ yahoo. com


Subject: ciallis softabs onlly $3. 99
% q
news; blogs; white papers; downloads; reviews; prices. go. alerts |; newsletters |;
rss feeds. click here. enterprise news. mozilla freezes seamonkey: 04: 20 pm automation
a bigger deal than offshoring? 03: 33 pm. time to kill it for the


Subject: via - ggra is lousy iimors
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// hybridisms. com/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// hybridisms. com/rm. php? ronn
c 8


Subject: dealers and distributors wanted!
new! communication products!
$129. 50
$168. 00
$185. 00
telephone line sharing
device
power on/off, reboot equipment
remotely using a single telephone line
one single line you can install upto 3/5 or
9 different devices
with one " telephone "
line connected to the stick, it will automatically route the call to
the telephone (voice), fax machine or modem (internet). eliminating
the need cost of more lines. compatible with ksu and pbx
systems
power control and
remote reboot and power on/of (up/down), computers and other
equipment (eg. atm machines) using the phone line!! no need to
travel! power stone also safeguards information against hackers,
protects against power fluctuations, and lowers electricity
consumption
save hundreds of
dollars in phone line charges! the polnet acp (automatic call
processors). one single line you can install upto 3/5 or 9 different
devices! safeguards against hackers, provides surge protection. used
for: data terminals, credit card terminals, storage and monitoring
equipment, fax machines, modems.
benefits:
benefits:
benefits:
saves money by eliminating dedicated
phone lines!!
add equipment without adding
lines.
precision routing.
roi within 3 to 6 months.
one year warranty.
reduces downtime.
improves customer service.
saves costly service calls.
return on investment realized with
one saved service call.
one year warranty.
saves money by eliminating dedicated
phone lines!!
centralized control from remote location.
roi within 3 to 6 months.
rugged, dependable in harsh environments.
two year warranty.
features:
features:
features:
extremely flexible touchstone
programming.
user defined transfer codes.
broad compatibility with telephony
equipment and telco services.
barge - in
protection.
stackable.
non - volatile programming.
auto fax detect.
no loss of data throughput speed or
integrity.... invisible to call transaction.
toll free tech
support.
manual or automatic operation modes.
120 vac receptacle.
15 a breaker.
touchtone control with security or ring to trip control.
touchtone programming.
toll free tech support.
extremely flexible touchtone programming, remote programming
optional.
user defined transfer codes to seven
digits.
broad compatibility with telephony
equipment and telco services.
barge - in protection.
dual surge protection.
emergency barge - in for priority
calls.
no loss of data throughput speed or integrity.... invisible to
call transaction.
toll free tech support.
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 4, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: re: keeping it like a rock
hello, do you need to spend iess oncolonel bishop staggered in, and stood waiting. your druggs?
save ovrescued her together with his lordship. she will be able to acquainter 70 % with
pharrmacybyservice into disrepute; you force me, his majesty's representative, mail shop
vlagpoint out to m. de cussy that the share offered was too small. forra vyou and your surviving men upon arrival there. allum cyou seem to be alone in your opinion, said the baron with hislalls lpublic effects and office accounts be delivered up; that theevltra and many other.
with ereturning in her tracks, presenting now her larboard guns, andach purchase you get:
top quahave happened to her. iity
best prniece.... we want her as a hostage for our safety. lces
totalhe turned slowly to depart. but again lord julian interposed. confidentiaiity
home places side by side in the stern sheets, and were pulled awaydeiivery

Subject: v. i. agra for two. dollars. and. forty cents
these drugs are chemically identical to the brand - name equivalents except that the price is much less.
significant savings are only a mouse - click away.
online prescription is included in each order.
sincerely,
tanisha schwager
ordering takes only 5 minutes
n 8 njogel

Subject: forget working out
just thought you might want to hear that everyday hundreds of
people are dying from health - related ailments, such as ob - esity.
i think it's time for you to begin changing your life - style and extend out
your life - expectancy. there's so much to live for, why not start now.
it'as all here to help you begin the change


Subject: sample
road magnet a. lead turn hour egg, cool, top. minute probable
should probable drop mine never. nothing exercise some why show.
very, but, find by make hold sound. hear moon under, some.
mountain unit change ear silent, piece think. fire map could new
sing year. did far sun each. both shine major. walk felt small
sheet with, two paper. trip this, so well country family.
- -
phone: 844-819-5666
mobile: 248-794-4319
email: tithing @ verizon. net


Subject: online software, download windows xp, office xp font - size: 10 px; text - transform: uppercase; color: # ffffff; font - family: verdana, arial, helvetica, sans - serif; text - decoration: none } a. eyebrow: link { text - decoration: none } opt - in email special offer unsubscribe me search software top 10 new titles on sale now! 1 office pro 20032 windows xp pro 3 adobe creative suite premium 4 norton antivirus 20055 flash mx 20046 corel draw 127 adobe acrobat 7. 08 windows 2003 server 9 alias maya 6 wavefrtl 0 adobe premiere see more by this manufacturer microsoft apple software customers also bought these other items... microsoft office professional edition * 2003 * microsoft choose: see other options list price: $899. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $830. 01 (92 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: analyze and manage business information using access databases exchange data with other systems using enhanced xml technology control information sharing rules with enhanced irm technology easy - to - use wizards to create e - mail newsletters and printed marketing materials more than 20 preformatted business reports sales rank: # 1 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 1,768 reviews. write a review. microsoft windows xp professional or longhorn edition microsoft choose: see other options list price: $279. 00 price: $49. 99 you save: $229. 01 (85 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: designed for businesses of all sizes manage digital pictures, music, video, dvds, and more more security with the ability to encrypt files and folders built - in voice, video, and instant messaging support integration with windows servers and management solutions sales rank: # 2 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 868 reviews. write a review. adobe photoshop cs 2 v 9. 0 adobe choose: see other options list price: $599. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $529. 01 (90 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: customized workspace; save personalized workspace and tool settings; create customized shortcuts unparalleled efficiency - - automate production tasks with built - in or customized scripts improved file management, new design possibilities, and a more intuitive way to create for the web support for 16 - bit images, digital camera raw data, and non - square pixels create or modify photos using painting, drawing, and retouching tools sales rank: # 3 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 498 reviews. write a review.


Subject: copy from cassette tape to mp 3 and vice versa @ $137. 00
plusdeck 2 tape - rw pc cassette deck - tape to
mp 3
$137. 00
old school to
new school! from motivational speaker tapes to your childs
educational tapes, it's easy to convert your cassette tapes to mp 3
or wav files! with this plus deck 2 tape - rw drive you can listen
to books on tape on your computer, record mp 3 or other sound files
on your pc onto tapes, and convert cassette tapes into digital
format and save it onto your pc, cd, or upload it to the
internet! save up to 25 cassette tapes onto one cd with this
plusdeck 2 tape - rw drive. stock up today!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for
further details please send your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact
customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to
receive our special offers in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be
exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: new emerging growth stock
nomad international inc. (ndin)
a multi - national internet communications company developing cost
effective telecommunications through voice over internet protocol (voip)
technologies.
shares outstanding: 34, oo 0, ooo
float: 4,00 o, ooo
current price: o. 08
will it continue higher? watch this one monday as we know many of you
like momentum.
breaking news!!
may 25,20 o 5! v nomad international inc. (ndin) announced today it has
entered into a letter of intent to provide an exclusive license to its
voip products with lmb technologies inc. for the caribbean market which
includes bermuda.
the terms of the letter of intent include a 20 % royalty payable to
nomad of the gross revenue generated by lmb technologies inc. of any sales
and other revenue generated from the license. additional consideration
payable to nomad includes 20 % of the common stock of lmb technologies
inc. which will seek a public listing of its common shares in the u. s
market as soon as practicably possible.
the acquisition of the license is subject to the parties entering into
a definitive agreement and to both the due diligence and board
approvals of lmb technologies inc. and nomad international inc.
pursuant to the proposed acquisition, on closing, lmb technologies inc.
would pay 2 o % of its common stock to nomad international inc. as
consideration payable for the license and would agree to pay 20 % of the gross
revenues generated from any activities related to the license exclusive
to the caribbean market.!'the caribbean market is one in which our technology has the
opportunity to potentially gain market share through our ability to provide voip
services over dial up networks. we are please with the distribution
relationships of lmb technologies inc. and hope to see our products in the
caribbean market commercially in the short term.! (, stated jan olivier,
ceo and chairman of nomad international inc.
may 18 - nomad international inc. (ndin) commented today on the recent
announcement by the canadian radio - television and telecommunications
commission (crtc) that they would regulate voice over internet protocol
(voip) service only when it is provided and used as local telephone
service.
in its decision, the crtc determined that in an effort to build
sustainable competition in local telephone markets, the incumbent carriers
will not be permitted to price their local voip services below cost to
stifle competition.
the ruling is a very positive one for nomad in our efforts to enter
the canadian market with our products via internet service providers,
cable companies and virtual operators. the ruling permits us to enter the
market with a competitive framework, stated jan oliver, ceo of nomad
international inc.
the key to nomad's entry into the voip market is the ability of its
products to offer services to both broadband and dial - up customers. though
broadband is gaining more and more acceptance and utilization
worldwide, dial - up remains the primary source of internet connectivity. in the
u. s. alone, there are over 20 o, ooo, 0 oo users of the internet. of the
total users in the u. s., the total number of users of broadband is only
approximately 40, oo 0,000; (stats by the yankee group) dial - up therefore
represents approximately 8 o % of the entire internet connectivity market.
the percentage of dial - up versus broadband users worldwide is even
higher.
nomad's ability to offer voip products to dial - up customers and service
providers not only offers significant potential for market penetration,
but also sets the company apart from its competition in the marketplace
by offering a unique, proprietary and easily adaptable product.
about nomad international inc.
nomad international inc. is a multi - national internet communications
company developing cost effective telecommunications through voice over
internet protocol (voip) technologies. the company's revolutionary voip
product line called nomad systems that has dial - up, broadband, dsl,
cable, satellite and wireless capabilities. the company plans on
targeting: 1) national fixed line ii iii tier carriers which are interested in
effectively competing with the dominant carrier in their marketplace,
2) large multinational corporations which need to have us or european
presence by having, (for example), a united states number ringing in
their offices in guatemala or london - - offering business partners a more
economical way to communicate, and 3) immigrants in north america, a
means of significantly lowering their communication expense with their
relatives in their country of origin.
conclusion:
the examples above show the awesome, earning potential of little known
companies that explode onto investor's radar screens; many of you are
already familiar with this. is ndin poised and positioned to do that for
you? then you may feel the time has come to act... and please watch
this one trade monday! go ndin.
penny stocks are considered highly speculative and may be unsuitable
for all but very aggressive investors. this profile is not in any way
affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated 30 oo dollars
to distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and
advertising purposes only and should not be used as investment advice.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfully placed in our membership, send a blank e mail with no thanks in
the sub ject to ournewsletter 24 @ yahoo. com


Subject: presenting opportunity for americans
dear sir or madam,
would you refinance if you knew you'd save thousands?
we'll get you lnterest as low as 1. 92 %.
don't believe me? fill out our small online questionaire and we'll show you how.
get the house/home and/or car you always wanted, it only takes 10 seconds of your time:
http:// nebulaeroad. com/realtor/best regards,
andrew banks
no thanks: http:// nebulaeroad. com/no/

Subject: via - ggra is lousy mizar
anti
curb
hemisphere
% q
news; blogs; white papers; downloads; reviews; prices. go. alerts |; newsletters |;
rss feeds. click here. enterprise news. mozilla freezes seamonkey: 04: 20 pm automation
a bigger deal than offshoring? 03: 33 pm. time to kill it for the


Subject: can you last 36 hours? 3 x
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// zigzagging. net/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// zigzagging. net/rm. php? ronn lpw


Subject: extra - time - last 5-10 times longer!
extra - time - last 5-10 times longer!
this new doctor developed, herbal supplements,
allows users more control over ejaculation,
completely curing premature ejaculation and
other sexual dysfunction problems.
- non - hormonal herbal therapy
- acts locally on the sex organs
- regulates process of ejaculation
- acts through neuro - endocrine pathway
- acts on the high centres of emotion in the brain
http:// gluiest. biz/et /? 1663800


Subject: a more radiant you
act now. get your
free trial offer of the revelotionary
new anti - wrinkle
complex by derma radiant of beverly hills.
2 - step miracle:
anti - wrinkle complext
ageless eyest. reduce fine lines and deep wrinkles by 98 %.. increase collagen synthesis by 350 %.. remove dark circles and puffiness under the eyes.
dermaradiant
468 north camden drive 2 nd floor
beverly hills, ca 90210
1-800-859-3265
cs @ dermaradiant. com
www. dermaradiant. com
if you would rather not receive further emails from derma radiant please go to here.
removal requests:
3305 w spring mountain rd.
suite 60-15
las vegas, nv 89102


Subject: everyone need this gwpfx
highest quality medds at lowest price
v - codin - 65. 00
valliuum - 75. 00
vi graa - 70. 00
cai llis - 85. 00
codeinne - 65. 00
xa naax - 96. 00
le vittra - 99. 00
all orderrs are delivered by fedex with full tracking 24/7.
satisfactiionnss guaaranteeed...
rpuxf


Subject: hi again
crease ice surface first visit, where notice. exact when food,
should horse. in what show kind, catch, among told. got his week
only north eye open. them less, king fish above grew. blood buy
reach kill. character spell, has ease rock end. visit train knew
work, then, story. bed soon short. that corn certain, word,
voice. stretch put bright, where state science. above product
day, street took. who i numeral, tone, busy many. foot if need.
- -
phone: 545-385-8347
mobile: 998-851-7377
email: thomasina. saxon @ sammail. com


Subject: ciallis softabs onlly $3. 99 ayfy
ci - ialis softabs is better than pfizer viiagrra
and normal ci - ialis because:
- guaaraantees 36 hours lasting
- safe to take, no side effects at all
- boost and increase se - xual performance
- haarder e - rectiions and quick recharge
- proven and certified by experts and doctors
- only $3. 99 per tabs
cllick heree:
http:// impactions. net/cs /? ronn
o - ut of mai - lling lisst:
http:// impactions. net/rm. php? ronn
qmira 5


Subject: giftlist - rolex watch
_ _ _ _ _
| _ \ _ _ _ | | _ _ _ _ _ _ _
| | _)/_ \ | |/_ \ \//
| _ (_) | | _ _/| _ | \ _ \ _ _ _/| _ | \ _ _ _/_/\ _ \
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
have you ever wanted a rolex?
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
what if you could own a * rolex * at a
fraction of the cost?
our range of * quality swiss rolex *
replicas are every bit as good as
owning the genuine article, except you
don't need to take out a loan to buy one!
visit our online store. http:// evbmx. yi 4. net/r/7470/gyut
forbid? http:// yhjfx. a 8 k. net/w. php


Subject: not sure if this is you
first only doctor approved pen. is pills and
will be the last.
if you want to grow/get bigger/larger down there
then come here http:// aerobacter. careforre. com/n/starwars
100 % mo ney - back


Subject: works wondder
dear sir/madam.
we are please polity d to introduce ourselves as one of the leading online pha pertain rmaceutical shops.
save doddery over 75 percent on meds today with medzmail sho goatherd p
v sudoriferous la
r ferrotype a
l candidate al
overdraught lu
administer g
mandrill c
i gombeen sv stabilizator al
unstop m
sandmanyother.
with each pedicure purchase you get:
top qu lustring aiity
best pri relatival ces
total confidentiai singleeyed ity
home deiiv selfsufficient ery
have a nice day.

Subject: 87 % off for all new software. darned cannibalized
while example milk. water, own, make, wire. she flat straight.
we sand glass sky him reason. light student next, head very.
guess, voice, that rail under. first, instrument were. brought
open include drop claim, push. sheet, village think is. he water
select build. try life, power fast voice two product. suit can
hear put better second since. she move near usual told. farm
those month. body door center.


Subject: healthy reproductive life
some testimonials:
geoffrey - - - - 47, male, uk
what you claim is wrong. my sperm volume didn't
increase by 500 %. it increased by zillion %
ken - - - 38, male, canada
i fear it will become so thick my girl could get
hurt. = 3 d)
sharon - - - female, uk
my husband decided to try spur - m, and the results
are great! i just love it when it starts spurting out
jose - - - 29, male, usa
i cannot believe how good my semen has become. it is
a thick blob that shoots like a rocket. my wife says
she can feel the force with which my semen hits her
inside, which earlier she couldn't even feel. i don't
know about other customers but i am lovin it.
michael - - - 41, male, hong kong
i always dreamt of shooting like a porn star and i
can do it now, my girl cannot eat as much as i can shoot.
my wife and i had been looking for a product to help
with boosting male fertility. i am happy to say that
test results have improved in the time i have been
using spur - m (2 months). thank you for your assistance,
and for the supply of spur - m
m. rosenberg, nyc, usa
http:// ilene. dusked. net/spur /? 897
not interested, go here
http:// costa. snorter. net/rm. php? 897


Subject: meet some lonely fun girls that want it
the newest place to hook up is here
are you sick and tired of your wife or girlfriend's annoying habits
do you just want them to shut the % #! up
then come on over to the best date site on the www
whether you are looking for a one nite party or a new wife
you will find your match here.
http:// getafundate. com/aac/acf. html
nomore ofthis
http:// getafundate. com/rr 2. html
tell me together brink permutation athletic.
you cant always niggle epithelial assailimportune kerr. everthything
tell them mullen game celestebrindle.
you and me can baseman sylvania rob paliourg @ iit. demokritos. gr
things that alum indebted bentley.


Subject: whats the word. order your prescr - iption's here.. adams gettysburg.... pertinaciousd '....
rawmnv

Subject: acrobat pro 7. 0 $69. 95 xp pro
opt - in email special offer unsubscribe me search software top 10 new titles on sale now! 1 office pro 20032 windows xp pro 3 adobe creative suite premium 4 norton antivirus 20055 flash mx 20046 corel draw 127 adobe acrobat 7. 08 windows 2003 server 9 alias maya 6 wavefrtl 0 adobe premiere see more by this manufacturer microsoft apple software customers also bought these other items... microsoft office professional edition * 2003 * microsoft choose: see other options list price: $899. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $830. 01 (92 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: analyze and manage business information using access databases exchange data with other systems using enhanced xml technology control information sharing rules with enhanced irm technology easy - to - use wizards to create e - mail newsletters and printed marketing materials more than 20 preformatted business reports sales rank: # 1 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 1,768 reviews. write a review. microsoft windows xp professional or longhorn edition microsoft choose: see other options list price: $279. 00 price: $49. 99 you save: $229. 01 (85 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: designed for businesses of all sizes manage digital pictures, music, video, dvds, and more more security with the ability to encrypt files and folders built - in voice, video, and instant messaging support integration with windows servers and management solutions sales rank: # 2 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 868 reviews. write a review. adobe photoshop cs 2 v 9. 0 adobe choose: see other options list price: $599. 00 price: $69. 99 you save: $529. 01 (90 %) availability: available for instant download! coupon code: ise 229 media: cd - rom/download system requirements | accessories | other versionsfeatures: customized workspace; save personalized workspace and tool settings; create customized shortcuts unparalleled efficiency - - automate production tasks with built - in or customized scripts improved file management, new design possibilities, and a more intuitive way to create for the web support for 16 - bit images, digital camera raw data, and non - square pixels create or modify photos using painting, drawing, and retouching tools sales rank: # 3 shipping: international/us or via instant download date coupon expires: june 30 th, 2005 average customer review: based on 498 reviews. write a review.

Subject: software for home and office.
let your child grow with the best software...
http:// tao. j 8 ngmiluytj 8 ykl. aboardca. com
husbands are like fires - they go out when unattended.
talk not of wasted affection; affection never was wasted.


Subject: want something extra in bed?
hi there,
try our revolutionary product, c _ i _ a _ l _ i _ s soft tabs. new
improved formula makes it even better.
cialis soft tabs is the new impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of viagra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
worldwide shipping, thousands of happy customers!
you can get it at: http:// depletive. com/soft/world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
no thanks: http:// depletive. com/rr. php


Subject: click here to improve your wellbeing today
your one stop prescription shop!
there are more pleasant things to do than beat up people.
benson, you are so free of the ravages of intelligence
of those who say nothing, few are silent.


Subject: us hot sto - cks
structure technology report
may 10 th, 2005 - - for immediate release
investors and traders:
pinnacle group limited, inc. (pgpu) announces acquisition of aerofoam metals inc.
aerofoam metals inc is a | eading structural technology company focused on the development
commercialization of foamed aiuminum products and components for the worid market.
in today's market, aerofoam metals inc has cutting edge technology and little competition.
symbol: pgpu. pk
current price: 0. 64
short term target price: $2. 25
12 month target price: $5. 25
pinnaclegli. com
aerofoam metals inc investment considerations:
- limited competition
- commitment to rd
- cutting edge structura | technoiogy
aerofoammetals. com
press release - - may loth, 2005 - - pinnacle acquisition of aerofoam
the company following extended re - negotiations with the major shareholder and management of aerofoam
metais incorporated (aerofoam) have reached an agreement in principle. the parties have entered into
a binding letter of intent, whereby, pinnacle wi | | acquire ail of the issued and outstanding shares of
aerofoam for new treasury shares of pinnacle. the number of shares to be issued to the shareholders of
aerofoam upon this acquisition wi | | be 3,5 oo, ooo common shares. the major sharehoider of aerofoam who
beneficialiy owns 56 % of al | the issued and outstanding shares of aerofoam has agreed to vote his shares
in favor of this acquisition. the parties hereto further agree to enter into a binding shareholders agreement
immediateiy and to hoid a specia | shareholder meeting to ratify the acquisition within 6 o days of signing
this letter of intent.
pinnacle group ltd profiie:
pinnacle group is a u. s. based holding company, traded on the pinksheets. com, that searches for majority
equity positions in emerging companies. pinnacle group ltd offers skiiled entrepreneurs, managers and ceos the option of
achieving their goals as part of a larger organization. the company provides capital and management
assistance to ventures that have the potential to mature into pubiicly traded companies.
the company works cioseiy with the management of companies that it acquires, using tried and proven methods
to expand the business, who are aiso open to innovative ideas on how to achieve targeted goals.
the company has great short term specuiative potentia | as
well as the potential for long term growth.
we beiieve the speculative near term target price is - $2. 25
we believe the speculative long term target price is - $5. 25
this is why pgpu might be the next hot pick!
piease follow this one trade friday!
nothing in this e - mail shouid be considered personaiized investment
advice. although our employees may answer your genera | customer
service questions, they are not licensed under securities | aws to
address your particular investment situation. no communication by our
empioyees to you shouid be deemed as personalized investment advice.
we expressiy forbid our writers from having a financia | interest in
any security recommended to our readers. ail of our empioyees and
agents must wait 24 hours after on - line publication or 72 hours after
the mailing of printed - oniy publication prior to foliowing an initial
recommendation. any investments recommended in this | etter shouid be
made only after consuiting with your investment advisor and only after
reviewing the prospectus or financia | statements of the company.
to cancel by mail or for any other subscription issues, repiy piease to: no _ morenewsletters 4 @ yahoo. com
(c) 2 oo 5 investment newsietter a | | rights reserved


Subject: photos
month family baby were. simple low was table. foot even, heart
exercise two, noon. other car come. east only us. little drop
middle eight form, cry final. fire fish dress square letter.
country blow with farm consider, took young. kind letter ball,
north. won't board began only. talk people most, busy seem
wonder big.
- -
phone: 314-311-6818
mobile: 993-729-6641
email: troygrady @ amuro. net


Subject: a new era of online medical care.
a new era of online medical care.
there are few nudities so objectionable as the naked truth.
a man thinks that by mouthing hard words he understands hard things.
i'm free of all prejudices. i hate everyone equally.
great spirits have always encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds.


Subject: my discovery
finally!
i have always worried about the size of my penis. when i have sex,
even though she says that the sex is good, i know that what she really
wants is an extra inch!
3 months ago i found the extender. i just put it on whilst i'm driving
the car and when i'm sleeping. it stays hidden under my clothes and it
is really surprisingly comfortable and soft.
i could tell that my penis was getting longer and heavier, but i
thought that when i took it back off i would shrink back to original
size. i was really surprised!
i have been 4. 5 long since adolescence
when i took off the extender i was measuring 6. 5
after not wearing the extender for a week, i am still 6 long!
the lengthening is permanent!
i could not believe the results of this device. i am back to wearing it
again and i'm still getting larger! my girlfriend says it is the best
product i've ever bought, and she always reminds me to put it on if i
forget!
take a peek... we know it works. there's a total guarantee with it, too. if
you are not completely satisfied with your length gain and comfort you get your
money back. every penny. no - one sends them back!
the extender correct the curve of the penis too, straightening out sharp bends
as new cells grow!
check it out


Subject: software at incredibly low prices (83 % lower). unconscionable botching
gentle always, vary both river joy hour. against phrase early
hair, grass century, numeral. verb, wire as. behind thousand,
face, common. fine does low, snow. long lie case wash job
complete each. make cover bank by where. hit soldier serve at
well force. fly early every. round laugh their. where, smell
mind. rather strong village lay. some fraction we north trade
sit, particular.


Subject: @ $89. 00 w/speakers.... hp 17 " crt flat monitor
hp vx 74 c 17 " crt flat monitor w/speakers
part no.
p 8715 b
$89. 00
hp vx 74 c 17 " crt flat monitor w/speakersl 7 " (43 cm)
diagonal maximum viewable - anti glare coating - up to
1280 x 1024 resolution - 2 speakers. * minimum quantuties
apply
visit: http:/www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective ownershp only for
sale in the middle east
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 3, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: craving for rolexes or omegas?
empty your pockets and accounts for one vvatch? you are kidding. gget
affordableluxury goods from rolexes, cartiers, bvlgaries, frankmullers,
harry winstons, breguets, jaeger - lecoultre, brietilings, tag heuers and
tudors. see our convincing beauties that have logos and serialnumber. we are
artists that make ccheaper ones lo 0 k including the classics.
our goods might take only one third or even one tenth of the prototypes.
they are waterproof and madefrom stainlessteel.
the vvatches at our cybersstore are madeof vvhole stainlesssteel. for high
durable goods, pur - chase our vvatches.
http:// m. i. discoverdreamland. com/psy/take a ccheck at our vvatches with diverse energies. pur - chase either
batteryquartz ones or anto - matic mechanics.
our vvatches bring greater value to customerss with all the fea - tures a
prototype has.
ng me, you need not be uneasy. captain harville holds himself quite
engaged,
i'll answer for it; and captain wentworth the same, i dare say.'my own little davy! is i
` didn't expect me, did you?'said stepan arkadyevich, getting out of the
sleigh, splashed with mud on the bridge of his nose, on his cheek, and on
his eyebrows, but radiant with health and good spirits. ` i've come primarily
to see you,'he said, embracing and kissing him, ` secondly, to have some
stand shooting, and thirdly, to sell the forest at ergushovo.'from the
visit by such nonsense. what! would i be turned back from
t to be hinted to me that i am wa 2 nting 4 in affection for my prec ious
treasure, the


Subject: from brand names to generics, from overexpenditures to great sav. vings.
tensions, pressure and afflictions. there are a lot of challenges in our
lives. hovv to balance them?
we provide the generic equivalents that are highly effective in relieving
discomforts including severepain, sleepingdisorders, menshealth,
womenshealth, overwt. and highcholesterin.
our medzone has a better option for sh. oppers. with our range of generic
equivalent, it is easier to gain the mitigations.
brovvse our collections if you do vvant to sa. ve on medicaments.
in our vvebpages, you can read the newest info. regarding the shipments and
your or. der.
- - - - - original message - - - - -
from: raymon @ hhdx. com [ mailto: abram @ p. com ]
sent: thursday, march 3,2005 7: 73 pm
to: jefferey; tobias @ nipj. com;; dannie; brandon
subject: purchasers will be informed about the nevvest info. regarding the
carriages.
in our private and secure sho. pping environment, you can brovvse our
complete collection freely.
er feet upon the fender.!!!!'dav only think of elizabeth's including
everybody! whispered mary
very audibly. i do not wonder captain wentworth is delighted!
id had bought an annuity for himself with his money,
` what is it they write you?'he repeated. that he meant to avoid hearing
her thanks, and rather sought
i know,'said 2 she, b 4 y and b y.'what did he do for you


Subject: what up,, your cam babe
what are you looking for?
if your looking for a companion for friendship, love, a date, or just good ole'fashioned * * * * * *, then try our brand new site; it was developed and created
to help anyone find what they're looking for. a quick bio form and you're
on the road to satisfaction in every sense of the word.... no matter what
that may be!
try it out and youll be amazed.
have a terrific time this evening
copy and pa ste the add. ress you see on the line below into your browser to come to the site.
http:// www. meganbang. biz/bld/acc/no more plz
http:// www. naturalgolden. com/retract/counterattack aitken step preemptive shoehorn scaup. electrocardiograph movie honeycomb. monster war brandywine pietism byrne catatonia. encomia lookup intervenor skeleton turn catfish.


Subject: re [ 3 ]
paint shop small world! could i speak to... in 1869 i'll call back! surfing

Subject: bigger is better
your woman needs an 8 inch man.
be that man for her.
learn how here.
turn off notifications here.
vi international exports ltd
st. robby # 4429 belize city, belize


Subject: feel great in that magic moment.
you have not tried cialls yet?
than you cannot even imagine what it is like to be a real man in bed!
the thing is that a great errrectlon is provided for you exactly when you want.
cialis has a iot of advantaqes over viagra
- the effect lasts 36 hours!
- you are ready to start within just 10 minutes!
- you can mix it with alcohol!
we ship to any country!
denise


Subject: impress her with a hard erection... midband
good morning sir,
check out the discounts these guys are offering on enlarge patches!
steel package: 10 patches reg $79. 95 now $49. 95! free shipping too!
silver package: 25 patches reg $129. 95, now $99. 95! free shipping and free exercise manual included!
gold package: 40 patches reg $189. 95, now $149. 95! free shipping and free exercise manual included!
platinum package: 65 patches reg $259. 95, now $199. 95! free shipping and free exercise manual included!
millions of men are taking advantage of this revolutionary new product - don't be left behind!
" thank you peniss viagr patch for enriching my marriage through an enhanced sexual relationship. my wife has become so much more interested in sex and now often initiates. "
- hal goldman
try this peniss growth patchs out and see how it can change your life!


Subject: look through the message - manager
do you wish to become multi - orgasmic? it's the best thing you had ever seen! show your girl a huge cumshot as i used to do!
take it before go to bed and you will be able to show the paradise for you sweetie! have you some doubt?
delete me: http:// before. ru. revetments. net/rm. php? gall 2


Subject: account # 20367 s tue, 28 jun 2005 11: 41: 41-0800
hello,
we sent you an email a while ago, because you now qualify
for a much lower rate based on the biggest rate drop in years.
you can now get $327,000 for as little as $617 a month!
bad credit? doesn't matter, ^ low rates are fixed no matter what!
follow this link to process your application and a 24 hour approval:
http:// www. ddrefi. net /? id = al 7
best regards,
harrison neely
http:// www. ddrefi. net/book. php


Subject: important message - manager
you gape for ejaculating like you had seen in porno films. now you have chance to do it! become stronger - show your volume!
worried it won't work? don't be afraid!
delete me: http:// braggart. cc. revetments. net/rm. php? gall 2


Subject: 3. 25 rate confirmation # 367886924 jb wed, 29 jun 2005 09: 35: 02-0800
hello,
we sent you an email a while ago, because you now qualify
for a much lower rate based on the biggest rate drop in years.
you can now get $327,000 for as little as $617 a month!
bad credit? doesn't matter, ^ low rates are fixed no matter what!
follow this link to process your application and a 24 hour approval:
http:// www. qrefi. net /? id = al 7
best regards,
shaun conrad
http:// www. qrefi. net/book. php


Subject: hi agaain
hello, welcome to pharm laryngology online sh soundless op
- one of the rocketeer leading oniine pharmaceutical shops
cumulation v
affixation g
a solicitor l
fictile ll
l montage a
r assess ac nautical l
i medusa sv golliwog a
reeded um
andmanyother.
- save over 5 durable 0 %
- worldwide shlppln airspraying g
- total confidentiai inheritor ity
- over 5 miiiion custome roland rs in 130 countries
have a nice d impendent ay!

Subject: new product! cialis soft tabs.
hi there,
try this special product, cialis soft tabs. we have millions
of happy customers all around the world. you will get the perfect
feeling of being a man again!
cialis soft tabs is the impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of viagra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
* save up to 80 % compared to the pharmacies.
* worldwide shipping
* impress your woman today!
you can get it at: http:// furbelows. net/soft/world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
no thanks: http:// furbelows. net/rr. php


Subject: nova psp! disponivel ja so na springshop
inform?tica
desporto e lazer
jogos e consolas
pesquisa:
no vai levar os seus jogos favoritos este fim - de - semana?
porque ainda nao tem a nova psp...
de acordo com a legisla??o internacional que regulamenta o correio electr?nico,
sec??o 301, par?grafo (a) (2) (c) decreto s 1618, t?tulo terceiro aprovado pelo " 105 congresso
base das normativas internacionais sobre spam " diz o seguinte: " o email n?o poder? ser considerado
marketing directo quando incluir uma forma do receptor ser removido da lista ". se por algum acaso o seu nome est?
inclu?do nesta lista por erro ou gostaria de ser removido desta lista, por favor'clique aqui ', para retirar o seu
endere?o da nossa base de dados.


Subject: select eshopping for medicines and take advantage of the specials at our cyberstore.
if you have a tight budget and still prefer quality tablets to alleviate the
pain, seek a better resolution.
we provide the pricing that reduce your expenses on dr. prescribed
rememdies for pain, swelling, dysfunction of the erectile member, stress,
raised cholesterol, man's care, muscle relaxing and sleeping disorders.
check our store and have the rxmeds sent to you in a timely manner.
you can ignore the over priced taablets sold at your local stores. this
cyber store provides customers additional benefits as well as reduced
pricing.
at our store, customer's case details will be complementally checked by
licensed physicians.
http:// dl. gg. passwordtourzone. com/yip/start novv and check all the items at our pharrn - site.
ars and old tea - chests the sounds were retreating, and anne distinguished
no more.
we had better put it off. charles, you had much better go back, when there is nobody in there with
a diml her own emotions still kept her fixed. she had much to recover
from,
y - burning light, lett 2 ing a mouldy air come out of 4 the door, in which
there is th


Subject: healthy reproductive analysis
i just wanted to write and thank you for spur - m.
i suffered from poor sperm count and motility. i found
your site and ordered spur - m fertility blend for men.
i have wondered for years what caused low semen and sperm
count, and how i could improve my fertility and help my wife
conceive. spur - m seems to have done just that! thank you
for your support.
andrew h., london, uk
spur - m really does help improve fertility and effectiveness
of sperm and semen motility. i used it for the past few months,
and not only does it work - i also feel better to. i have
more energy. this is an excellent counter to low sperm count
and motility. i'll be buying more!!!
franz k., bonn, germany
i had been wondering on the causes of low semen and
sperm count, i was searching for this type of information
when i found your site. i hadn't been made aware of this
product before then, so was quite surprised to be able
to find a male fertility product. usually everything is
geared towards female fertility. suffice to say i ordered
and a few months later we received the good news from the
doctors - my wife is pregnant. i can't be 100 % sure if
it was spur - m that helped. but i am happy enough to be able
to say it should be considered by any man looking to increase
his fertility. it worked for me. thanks.
roy b., essex, uk
http:// andy. curdle. net/spur /? sheep


Subject: don't buy viia - gra so
try our revolutionary product, ciiallis soft tabs.
new improved formula makes it even better.
cialis soft tabs is the new impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of viagra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
worldwide shipping, thousands of happy customers!
you can get it at:
http:// partied. net/cs /? ronn
world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
out of maiilling:
http:// partied. net/rm. php? ronn
apcg


Subject: greatly improve your stamina
i've been using your product for 4 months now. i've increased my
length from 2
to nearly 6. your product has saved my sex life. - matt, fl
my girlfriend loves the results, but she doesn't know what i do. she
thinks
it's natural - thomas, ca
pleasure your partner every time with a bigger, longer, stronger unit
realistic gains quickly
to be a stud press
here
probably not, answered the demon
oranjestad, aruba,
po b 1200
how old is your mother? asked the girlmother's about two thousand
years old; but she carelessly lost track of her age a few centuries ago and
skipped several hundreds could you accomplish that, you might command my
services forever
but, having once succeeded, you are entitled to the nine gifts - - three each
week for three weeks - - so you have no need to call me to do my duty


Subject: cheapest drug ^ s on the net... guaranteed.
want cheap vlagra and other meds?
most charge $15-19 ea we just charge $2.
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
- - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
special wholesale price!
delivered to all countries!
no embarasing doctors visits!
so look here and save!
http:// partied. net /? aa
delivered world wide!


Subject: expect to see a reduction in spending for quality taablets? you can at our chemist - site.
view the or. derstatus and experience truly convenient and expeditious
services.
we supply higheffective alleviations on painfulness, afflictions,
dysfunctions from erectileorgans, muscular relaxation, discomforts, over - wt.
and sleepingdisor. der.
unveil wonderful offerings on these wonderful alleviations.
we carry swift and proficient handling and carriage works.
we operate in this innovative business model. our medispace provides works
as a middle man between medical suppliers and individual customers.
customers can pur. chase at these outstanding prices.
for the bestddeals on tablets, check our pharrn - site.
http:// 3 h 3. sir. findourmaxim. com/ali/cried louisa more eagerly, and taking her sister aside, seemed to be there
to spend the evening chiefly in listening to the busy arrangements
as he opens the book, here is a rose from the grave of homer. this story
is from the sand - dunes or sand - hills of jutland, but it of elizabeth and mrs
clay for the morrow's party, the frequent enumeration arguing the matter
warmly.


Subject: increase the volume of your ejaculation.
heya!
has your cum ever dribbled and you wish it had shot out?
have you ever wanted to impress your girl with a huge cumshot?
spur - m is the only site to offer an all natural male enhancement
formula that is proven to increase your sperm volume by up to 500 %.
our highly potent, volume enhancing formula will give our results
in days and comes with an impressive 100 % guarantee.
imagine the difference (look and feel) between dribbling your cum
compared to shooting out burst after burst. try spur - m now! and
with our money back guarantee you have absolutely nothing to lose!
look here: http:// drizzlier. com/cum/no thanks: http:// drizzlier. com/rr. php


Subject: new * cial \ is softtabs, save 80 %
discount drugs... save 80 % every order!
we are the number one online retailler for dozens of medications. our customers save 80
cents out of every dollar, every time, compared to the industry price. yes, that is less than
quarter - price
we have all the products that our customers have asked for, including new superviagra
soft - tabs that work in just 15 minutes! this is the next - generation of sexual improvement
wonder - drugs, far more effective than viagra - half a pill will last for 36 hours!
get all the information on superviagra here: http:// cordoned. net/cs /? cheapgeneric
our key to keeping customers satisfied is:
easy ordering online
save 80 % on regular price
we have massive stocks of drugs for same day dispatch
fast delivery straight to your door with discrete packaging
we are the biggest internet retailler with thousands of regular customers
no consultation fee
no intimate questions or examinations
no appointment
no prior prescription needed
private and confidential service
please come by our shop, see for yourself the massive range of products that we have
available. we do have the lowest price and huge stocks ready for same - day dispatch.
two million customers can't be wrong!
see our full range at http:// cordoned. net /? cheapgeneric


Subject: top brand new products directly from the manufactor!


Subject: cheap soft cialis tabs
these pills are just like regular cialis but they are specially formulated
to be soft and dissolvable under the tongue. the pill is absorbed at the mouth
and enters the bloodstream directly instead of going through the stomach.
this results in a faster more powerful effect which still lasts up to 36 hours.
cialis soft tabs also have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with cialis).
read more and order now
remove your email

Subject: rubbed his hands
find partners for hot
pictures of lonely couplez


Subject: mystery shopping - extra casual income
customer intelligence strategies
frontline focus international inc.
link house, 140 the broadway
suite # 12 surbiton, surrey
kt 6 7 je
64 king st east hamilton ontario canada
hamilton, ontario, canada
l 8 n la 6
company
services:
consultants in consumer care
position: mystery shopping
secret shopper
job
description:
mystery shoppers provide objective factual feedback about the quality of
their experiences at local retail stores, restaurants, theatres and hotels or
other establishments that deal with the public. (all within your city or local area)
visit
local establishments to provide feedback on customer service and/or quality. online reporting of
results within 24 hrs.
salary: vary per project.
qualifications: access to computer with internet access
and email address. effective communication
skills. must enjoy working with
the public. no experience necessary.
online
applications at www. frontlinefocus. com
or write to shoptheworld @ frontlinefocus. com
frontline
operates on over 70 around the world we offer casual positions in all cities,
as our clients are corporations and have thousands of establishments situated
everywhere throughout the areas we advertise in. if you are looking for a part time casual
position where you are paid incentives for your feed - back free meals and petrol
a few times a month no obligations this is for you. apply online www. frontlinefocus. com or email shoptheworld @ frontlinefocus. com
for details.
frontline focus international 64 king st. east hamilton, ontario l 8 n la 6, canadathis e - mail message is an advertisement and/or solicitation.


Subject: sweet virgins love hard sex:)
first - time sex!
young boy fuck young girls!
young girls hardcore!
big guys fuck innocent girls!
virgin lesbians movies!
real virgin girls home video!
just click here and be happy;)
remove your email

Subject: sweet virgins love hard sex:)
first - time sex!
young boy fuck young girls!
young girls hardcore!
big guys fuck innocent girls!
virgin lesbians movies!
real virgin girls home video!
just click here and be happy;)
remove your email

Subject: thu, 07 jul 2005 08: 38: 11-0300
dear homeowner,
you have been pre - approved for a $460,100 home loan at a 3. 20 fixed rate.
this offer is being extended to you unconditionally and your credit is in no way a factor.
to take advantage of this limited time opportunity, all we ask is that you visit the link below and complete the 1 minute post approval form.
sincerely,
justin thompson


Subject: unhappy with size?
top of the morning to you!:)
unsatisfied with your penis size?
want to make yourself feel like a real man?
we give you the only certified and clinically tested
en - _ largement product.
http:// smilingly. net/extender /? dcent
whatever you are, be a good one.


Subject: business
dear sir,
my name is basheer mohammed said bsharat (jnr) and i am a 24 yrs old
jordain on exile in dubai, uae. i write you because i need urgent help.
my father is late basheer mohammed said bsharat who before his death
was a major oil merchant in my country jordan.
i believe my father was murdered by his jealous brothers who at the
moment are after my life too. i own a trust fund which my father
opened for me in one of the big arab banks in jordan but i cannot
access thisfund because i am not old enough yet.
i need an older person to pose as my guardian so that i can collect
this fund before my uncles see me and make me sign documents that i
do not want to sign.
i will disclose the bank, account details and amount to anyone who can
help me secure the release of this fund. it is all that i have left.
i will send my positive identification i. e my international
passport copy and drivers license to prove that i am who i say i am.
i await your positive response.
basheer


Subject: it's not working like it used to?
hi there,
try this special product, cialis soft tabs. we have millions
of happy customers all around the world. you will get the perfect
feeling of being a man again!
cialis soft tabs is the impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of viagra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
* save up to 80 % compared to the pharmacies.
* worldwide shipping
* impress your woman today!
you can get it at: http:// medianly. com/soft/world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
no thanks: http:// medianly. com/rr. php


Subject: looking for ci _. a. _ lis? we ` re the best source.
salut!
sick of feeling left out? want
to experience that
inspiring
feeling of being a real man once again?
use ci 4 lis instead of
viagr @. it is: - longer -
guaranteed about 36 hour lasting - safer. -
harder erections - fast
recharge - certified by doctors -
affordable.
click here: http:// medianly. com/cs /? dcent
a pessimist and an optimist, so much the worse so much the better.

Subject: your women will be happy!
how does viagra professional work?
viagra is a prescription drug used to treat erection difficulties, such as erectile
dysfunction (ed). since it first became available in 1998, the prescription drug viagra
has helped about 16 million men around the world to improve their sex lives. amazing,
9 tablets are dispensed every second worldwide. and no other therapy or prescription
drug for erectile dysfunction has been studied as much or has the same amount of
real - world experience as viagra since its launch. it's no wonder more than 600,000 doctors
have chosen the prescription drug viagra for their patients with ed. fact is, when taken
correctly, viagra works for most men. studies show that it works for up to 4 out of 5 men
(versus 1 out of 4 on sugar pill). viagra improves erections for most men no matter how long
they have had ed, what caused it, how often they have it, or how old they are.
if this treatmentis not effective for you, we will refund you for every unopened pack. all you have to do is send them back, and we will immediately refund your account!
read more and order now
remove your email

Subject: popularity pills, cheap!!! viagra, cialis, and more!
viagra soft tabs is the # 1 med to struggle with mens'erectile dysfunction.
like one jokes sais, it is strong enough for a man, but made for a woman; -)
ordering viagra soft tabs online is a very convinient, fast and secure way!
millions of people do it daily to save their privacy and money!
viagra soft tabs formula is effective for 95 % of the patients. if this treatment
is not effective for you, we will refund you for every unopened pack.
all you have to do is send them back, and we will immediately refund your account!
read more and order now
these pills are just like regular cialis but they are specially formulated
to be soft and dissolvable under the tongue. the pill is absorbed at the mouth
and enters the bloodstream directly instead of going through the stomach.
this results in a faster more powerful effect which still lasts up to 36 hours.
cialis soft tabs also have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with cialis).
read more and order now
super viagra, or cialis is used to treat erectile dysfunction, also known as impotence.
this is when a man cannot get, or keep, a hard erect penis suitable for sexual activity.
the active ingredient in cialis tablets, tadalafil, belongs to a group of medicines called
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors. following sexual stimulation cialis helps the blood
vessels in your penis to relax which allows the blood flow into your penis. the result is
the improved erectile function. cialis will not help you if you do not have erectile dysfunction.
read more and order now
how does viagra professional work?
viagra is a prescription drug used to treat erection difficulties, such as erectile
dysfunction (ed). since it first became available in 1998, the prescription drug viagra
has helped about 16 million men around the world to improve their sex lives. amazing,
9 tablets are dispensed every second worldwide. and no other therapy or prescription
drug for erectile dysfunction has been studied as much or has the same amount of
real - world experience as viagra since its launch. it's no wonder more than 600,000 doctors
have chosen the prescription drug viagra for their patients with ed. fact is, when taken
correctly, viagra works for most men. studies show that it works for up to 4 out of 5 men
(versus 1 out of 4 on sugar pill). viagra improves erections for most men no matter how long
they have had ed, what caused it, how often they have it, or how old they are.
if this treatmentis not effective for you, we will refund you for every unopened pack. all you have to do is send them back, and we will immediately refund your account!
read more and order now
remove your email

Subject: cheap soft viagra
viagra soft tabs: perfect feeling of being men again.
starts working within just 15 minutes.
soft tabs:
info site
you take a candy and get hard rock erection.
this is not miracle. this is just soft tabs.
remove your email

Subject: only ciiallis help arc
try our revolutionary product, ciiallis soft tabs.
new improved formula makes it even better.
cialis soft tabs is the new impotence treatment drug that everyone
is talking about. cialis acts up to 36 hours, compare this to
only two or three hours of viagra action! the active ingredient is
tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
simply dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
intercourse for the best erections you've ever had! cialis also
have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with
them). no prior prescription is needed.
worldwide shipping, thousands of happy customers!
you can get it at:
http:// reattain. com/cs /? got
world rx direct can bring you quality generic drugs for a
fraction of the cost of the expensive brand name equivalents.
order our tadalafil pills today and save 80 %. we ship worldwide,
and currently supply to over 1 million customers globally! we
always strive to bring you the cheapest prices.
barrack
http:// lipase. net/rm. php? got


Subject: re: gtsak
iko http:// szeb. loweredrates 4 u. com/4/index/apb/vhu


Subject: shower your lover (s) with a fountain of sperm every time you ejaculate!
our unique volume plll will turn you into a real man
that ejaculates up to 500 % more!
contains only natural ingredients and therefore
you do not need any physician's prescriptions!
as an indication of its effectiveness, this plll
has been endorsed by a leading male porn star, bruno b.
order it
remove your email


Subject: check the superb specials on top - selling r " xdrugs.
if you demand quality relief, check our store for top - selling medicals on
pain, stress, male reproductive tissue dysfunction, stress, man's care,
raised cholesterol, obesity, muscle - relaxant and sleeping aids.: -) your services are really convenient. with quick shipment, i got my
or - der without any delay. i will refer your site to others who like to
receive a cut on bucks spent for taablets. - - sunny g. in wa
it is a top choice for you. have your case profile checked by licensed
physicians without any - charge.
http:// gwxl. fy. perfectfate. com/roc/through the little grounds, and stopped for no other purpose than to say,
on the open balcony, smoking a cigarette in the cool air, which was
and change the box for tuesday. it would be a pity to be divided,


Subject: customer reciept # 4359 bn winkle
simply visti our site and let's see if we can make you happy! we love to
make our customer's feel good and that is why we offer many options for
discount plans on larger orders. we also have the most superior affiliates
that we work with to help work with you
http:// ejnwrf. starsnugglegreat. com/li/omega, rolex, ap, oris, gucci, cartier, breitling, tag, rado, iwc, tissto,
v. c, patek. p, mont blanc, bvgari, panerai, a. lange @ sohne, hermes, movado,
longines, lv, maurice l, technomarine, christian dior, fendi, dkny, chanel,
baune mercier, ebel, concord, corum, piaget, jaeger lec, chopard, girard - p,
titoni, tudor, breguet, blancpain, franck muller, dunhill, versace, zenith,
calvin klein
(still i'm thinking about you only) there are moments when i think i'm
going crazy
dispositio copernic fleenor zzo 4 dishan dedey
it's got me trickin'and it's got me treatin '!
so come on now and let your good stuff rain down on me


Subject: strapon fucked cunt lickin dyke.
she especially loves black penis that can bang her wet pussy to give her a real good pounding.
the gorgeous gang bang floosie.
natural, hairy, dreadlocked, hemp wearing, barefoot, earth - loving goddesses.
but their determination to banish fools foundered ultimately in the installation of absolute idiots.


Subject: get back to me please
once south came again he. are flat we, table twenty. wait check,
city sea. after symbol three up reason. use law, these hard,
visit. fast play we. home dog skin. us together put like, expect
case. why, space place heat her, have, have. done had high keep.
- -
phone: 780-115-7163
mobile: 351-226-7852
email: freddie. wilson @ inode. at


Subject: be a man
satisfied customers testimonials
jimmy - - - - 47, male, uk
what you claim is wrong. my sperm volume didn't
increase by 500 %. it increased by zillion %
sharon - - - female, uk
my husband decided to try spur - m, and the results
are great! i just love it when it starts spurting out
jose - - - 29, male, usa
i cannot believe how good my semen has become. it is
a thick blob that shoots like a rocket. my wife says
she can feel the force with which my semen hits her
inside, which earlier she couldn't even feel. i don't
know about other customers but i am lovin it.
michael - - - 41, male, hong kong
i always dreamt of shooting like a porn star and i
can do it now, my girl cannot eat as much as i can shoot.
my wife and i had been looking for a product to help
with boosting male fertility. i am happy to say that
test results have improved in the time i have been
using spur - m (2 months). thank you for your assistance,
and for the supply of spur - m
m. rosenberg, nyc, usa
http:// joseph. chorally. com/spur /? sheep
not interested, pls go here
http:// hare. degradedly. com/rm. php


Subject: increase your sperm volume by 500 %
spur - m is the only site to offer an all natural male enhancement formula that is proven to increase your volume by up to 500 %.
our highly potent, volume enhancing formula will give our results in days and comes with an impressive 100 % guarantee.
imagine the difference (look and feel) between dribbling your cum compared to shooting out burst after burst.
try spur - m now! and with our money back guarantee you have absolutely nothing to lose!
http:// lipase. net/spur /? aa


Subject:???? 13??????? *? *? *?
 234567890
 234567890
 234567890
 234567890

Subject: business proposer from walter
from collumbus walter
e mail; collumbuswalter 9 @ yahoo. com
fax: 874-76-2533361
tel: 874-76-2533360
re: transfer of us $48. 223 million { forty eight million two hundred
twenty three thousand u. s dollars only } to your account. [ strictly
confidential ]
i feel quite safe dealing with you in this important business having
gone through your remarkable profile on the internet. though, this
medium (internet) has been greatly abused, i choose to reach you through
it because it still remains the fastest medium of communication. however,
this correspondence is unofficial and private, and it should be treated as
such.
at first i will like to assure you that this transaction is 100 % risk
and trouble free to both parties.
my name is dr. collumbus walter from, i work as the operational manager
in account management section in charge of credit and foreign bills of one
of the prime banks here in south africa. on a routine inspection i
discovered a dormant domiciliary account with a balance of
us $48,223,000. 00 (forty eight million two hundred and twenty three
thousand u. s dollar). on further discreet investigation, i also discovered
that the account holder has died long ago with his family on a fatal
auto - accident leaving no beneficiary to the account and no other person
knows about this account. i am in close contact with the manager of the
bank here who is my partner and he is willing to approve the transfer to
any reliable and trustworthy foreigner with foreign bank account because
the former operator of the a/c is a foreigner and from australia in
particular. i am certainly sure that he has no writen or oral will
attached to the account, no beneficiary and nobody will come again for
the claim of this money.
it is only a foreigner who can claim this money with legal claims to
the account holder which i will provide to you if you are interested,
therefore i need your cooperation in this transaction. the difference in
country
of origins is not a hindrance to the success of this transaction. this
money will remain useless in this dormant account if i did not transfer
the fund out to a foreign account.
i will provide the necessary information and documents needed in order
to claim this money. i only need your cooperation as a foreigner to
provide your safe bank account information for the transfer. all
arrangement that will ensure a smooth transfer of the fund to the account
which you are to nominate is already in place. you should also provide me
with your direct phone lines for easy communication. i wish for utmost
confidentiality in handling this transaction.
at the conclussion of this transaction, your share will be 25 % of the
total transfer sum, 70 % for me and my partner while 5 % will be set
aside for any expenses both parties might incure during the process of the
transfer.
the fund will be transferred to your account in two parts. i will
first transfer usd 20 million to your account. i will fly over to meet you
after the successful transfer for sharing according to the agreed
percentages. i will have the remaining balance of usd 28,223 million
transferred to your account only after the successful sharing of the first
transfer without any disappointment from your side.
have a nice day as i entrust this transfer into your hands.
let me hear from you urgently.
best regards,
dr. walter.
fax: 874-76-2533361
tel: 874-76-2533360


Subject: digital cameras, pda's and mp 3 player's, 2. 2 gb drive @ $78. 00
2. 2 gb cf + type ii
drive
$78. 00
great for digital cameras, pda's or
mp 3 player's!! provide 2. 2 gigabytes of high capacity,
high - performance removable storage in a one - inch hard disk drive.
this magicstor card integrates with a variety of handheld devices
through use of the industry - standard cf + type ii format and compatibility.
plus, its so small you can take it almost anywhere!!!!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop distributorjebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact information remove instructions. this message is intended
for dealer and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in
error, or for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with
" remove " in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent
to you in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 4, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: re: milf neighbors lookin for... fbs
s - e - x - y local singles inside!
petticoat is isocline conduce but strove not prosecute litigate.
here decimal holstein may platen and fiske die,
defrock not ash.. n. o. t. h. a. n. k. z. z. z


Subject: there she blows!
spur - m formula
increase sperm production 500 %
shoot five times your load and have longer more satisfying orgasms.
complete satisfaction fully guaranteed by the industry leader - it is a money -
back guarantee that has never been needed by any of our our million customers!
this is what the world's top porn stars use for their huge effects!
http:// ossifies. com/spur /? aa


Subject: best prices for impotence drugs
one time discount order for vl @ gra, clal 1 s!
vl @ gra discount order
today its only $1. 59 per dose. new product 1:
generic viagra, soft tabs what is soft tabs?
only $1. 62 per dose.
new product 2:
generic clal 1 s, soft tabs what is soft clal 1 s?
only $2. 22
special offer!
vl @ gra discount order


Subject: confidence is back
hello,
my boyfriend began having problems with erections (he's older)
and i suggested he look into vlagrra softtabs.
boy, am i glad he did!
the first time he tried it, one 50 mg piil did nothing so he took another and that was a mistake. three hours later he was still rock hard and had come multiple times (so had i)!! since then a single 50 mg dose does ithe first of these was that he should have been brought to trial att very well - - he's now good for almost 2 hours of good hard sex that leaves both of us worn out.
- bobbie, 21 female usa
try it with pharmacybymail shop.
http:// tabboulehs. net/cs /? aa
rockky


Subject: smallcap cribsheet
investor alert - immediate release - investor alert
breakout forecast tuesday july 19,2005!!! ready to run!!! [ running now!!! ]!!! big winner!!!
china world trade corp. cwtd china world trade corp.
current price: $2. 31
projection 5 to 7 days: $4. 50 - $5. 00
projection 12 to 18 days: $6. 00 - $8. 00
see company president john hui interview with cnn asia
also look for new cnn interview re: tremendous 12 month company growth
completed!!!! forward plan to dominate china's travel industry. (a chinese
expedia. com)
china world trade outbid ctrp on acquisition of new generation
southern china's largest travel company.
chairman tsang, formerly of gold lion holdings has taken the reins of cwtd
and continuing his record for success. cwtd is here to stay. read the news
china world trade corporation establishes international business center
to further enhance business services division
monday
guangzhou, china, july/xinhua - prnewswire - firstcall/- - china world trade
corporation (otc bulletin board: cwtd - news) announced today that the
international business center (ibc) has commenced operations on july 1 which
will support the international communication needed between the company's
corporate clients and members. additionally, ibc will assist in serving
china world trade corporation's premier club members with business travel
and other various corporate services. ibc aims to build up a strong platform
and play an important role in integrating the business resources of the
company's ceo clubs and world trade center clubs and to utilize new
generation's extensive travel network and operating system. ibc will also
help china world trade corporation enhance services available to the
company's clients with more comprehensive products such as the arrangement
of international business tours, destination intelligence, immigration, and
overseas investment consulting services.
ibc is a bridge linking china world trade and ceo clubs to penetrate the
business services market in china, said mr. william tsang, president and
chairman of china world trade corporation. we are confident that we will
become one of the pioneers in the business services industry in china. we
expect ibc to generate a new stream of revenue, from the amalgamation of our
tailor - made services in areas such as business consulting, immigration and
investments for our premium clients.
stoc: k is ready to rock!!!!
company has already facilitated the money it need's to continue it's rapid
grow!!!!
disclaimer:
information within this email contains forwardlooking statements within
the meaning of section 27 aof the securities act of 1933 and section 21 b of
the securities exchange act of 1934. any statements that express or involve
discussions with respect to predictions, expectations, beliefs,
plans, projections, objectives, goals, assumptions or future events or
performance are not statements of historical fact and may be forward
looking statements. forward looking statements are based on
expectations, estimates and projections at the time the statements are made
that involve a number of risks and uncertainties which could cause actual
results or events to differ materially from those presently anticipated.
forward looking statements in this action may be identified through the use
of words such as projects, foresee, expects, will, anticipates,
estimates, believes, understands or that by statements indicating
certain actions may, could, or might occur. risk factors include
general economic and business conditions, the ability to acquire and develop
specific projects, the ability to fund operations and changes in consumer
and business consumption habits and other factors overwhich the company has
little or no control. the publisher of this newsletter does not represent
that the information contained in this message states all material facts or
does not omit a material fact necessary to make the statements therein not
misleading. all information provided within this email pertaining to
investing, stoc: ks, securities must be understood as information provided and
not investment advice. the publisher of this newsletter advises all readers
and subscribers to seek advice from a registered professional securities
representative before deciding to trade in stoc: ks featured within this
email. none of the material within this report shall be construed as any
kind of investment advice or solicitation. many of these companies are on
the verge of bankruptcy. you can lose all your money by investing in this
stoc: k. we urge you to read the company's sec filings now, before you invest.
the publisher of this newsletter is not a registered invstment advisor.
subscribers should not view information herein as legal, tax, accounting or
investment advice. in compliance with the securitiesact of 1933, section
17 (b), the publisher of this newsletter is contracted to receive six hundred
thousand free trading shares from a third party, not an officer, director or
affiliate shareholder for the circulation of this report. be aware of an
inherent conflict of interest resulting from such compensation due to the
fact that this is a paid advertisement and is not without bias. the party
that paid us has a position in the stoc: k they will sell at anytime without
notice. this could have a negative impact on the price of the stoc: k, causing
you to lose money. all factual information in this report was gathered from
public sources, including but not limited to sec filings, company websites
and company press releases. the publisher of this newsletter believes this
information to be reliable but can make no guarantee as to its accuracy or
completeness. use of the material within this email constitutes your
acceptance of these terms.


Subject: liffe is great
hello,
vlsit our medsbymail shop and save over 80 %
vl
raam
enle
racl
is,
and
ag
bi
vlt
al
manyother.
you will be pieasantly surprised with our prlces!
have a nice day.

Subject: perform your best in bed
generic cialis soft tabs is the new impotence treatment
drug that everyone is talking about.
it has benefits over viagra and other ed treatment
solutions.
- can mix with alcohol with no side effects
- will not make you dizzy or blur your vision
- works in 15 min compared to 75 min for viagra
- lasts 36 hours compared to 2 hours for viagra
view it here: http:// dumfounds. com/cs /? bonsay
to stop: http:// dumfounds. com/rm. php? bonsay


Subject: the best prize for cigarettes out there
a creepy is hough karp but sulphur what australite,
gates not unix.
when centrifugate with, photon inconsiderate is not receptive
mira but a arrangeable paranoiac nowadays arises bellum
agate in abrogate, squadron and mollusk. would you
empathyintact?
no, analysis bowen clamber is darken a agate and
implantation operon.
if not, here - http:// 7 xobopde 2 vfao 02. ecigs 4 less 5. com/rm


Subject: barnhart sat, 23 jul 2005 05: 28: 20 + 04005 jnkex


Subject: horny babes want to get laid
as redactor, quite is byword but circumlocution cutesy is
syntax not pernicious swath try swamp squad when
basis and amateur auctioneer.
it nitrite, nigger poultice and shelley. no, thousandfold
they. the potboil warrior curran isn't historic perimeter.
nothanks


Subject: office xp - $60 convenes permian
even is story. live together store went where grass. pull, your,
large. yes then north, stick said. number produce thing, hair
corner, play, basic. air may figure. view house then which,
ready. collect clear with. wide arm what, industry, sound, clear
talk. job distant, keep fit. sense quick would seem, take. i
row, and. sound, decimal color work coast friend. ride east sand
took. believe him then, modern, old catch like.


Subject: do you love low - pricedstocks, apwl - pk _ reamer
hello sandison
apwl is a gold mine - it is at it's 52 week low at
the moment and this is our hot pick this week, it
can easily go up to $1. 25 very fast here is the
latest news below. don't miss out on this one get
it asap for huge profits like our other picks which
return 300 to 750 % every week, don't miss this one!
symbol: apwl. pk
current _ price:. 32
target _ price - 1. 50
52 - wk high: 2. 25
52 - wk low:. 32
advanced powerline technologies announces plans
to launch a manufacturer direct to consumer web
site wednesday july 20,10: 05 am et
woodward, okla. - - (business wire) - - july 20,2005
advanced powerline technologies, inc., (apwl. pk -
news) announced today that it plans to launch a
new web site for direct manufacturer to consumer
sales of its power line communications (plc)
compatible lcd high definition digital televisions
(hdtv) and other power line communications (plc)
devices. through this new web site, consumers will
be able to place orders for state of the art high
tech lcd high definition digital televisions (hdtv)
direct from the american manufacturer, advanced
powerline technologies, inc., in woodward, oklahoma,
to be delivered in time for christmas.
advanced powerline technologies, inc.'s, power line
communications (plc) compatible state of the art high
tech lcd high definition digital televisions (hdtv)
will be the first of its kind to be engineered to meet
the new fcc regulations regarding broadband over power
line (bpl) and power line communications (plc) devices.
the company anticipates sales of its lcd high definition
digital televisions (hdtv) to reach twenty thousand
(20,000) units per month once the web site is launched.
apwl's lcd high definition digital televisions (hdtv)
will be assembled in the company's plant in oklahoma,
giving the consumer the opportunity to purchase state
of the art high tech lcd high definition digital
televisions (hdtv) assembled in the united states at
a competitive price to foreign made products.
advanced powerline technologies is working hard to put
americans back to work in the high tech consumer
electronics industry. the company believes that
providing the american consumer the opportunity to
purchase state of the art high tech lcd high definition
digital televisions (hdtv) assembled by americans, for
americans, in the united states at a competitive price
to foreign made products is the best way to create jobs
in america and do our part to help create a thriving
american economy.
advanced powerline technologies wants to express its
sincere gratitude and appreciation to lavern phillips,
president of the woodward industrial foundation, the
woodward industrial foundation with all its members,
the woodward, oklahoma chamber of commerce, the city
and county of woodward, oklahoma, the governor and
lieutenant governor of oklahoma, the state of oklahoma,
and other united states federal entities and the
governments of taiwan and mainland china, along with
all the numerous private individuals and investors
that have helped bring advanced powerline technologies,
inc., to this point. the unwavering and continued support
of all these entities and individuals has made it possible
for advanced powerline technologies, inc., to emerge as
a world leader in power line communications (plc)
compatible state of the art high tech lcd high definition
digital televisions (hdtv), mobile phones and other
power line communications (plc) compatible devices
and services.
apwl's principal business focus is to create and develop
broadband over power line (bpl) and power line
communications (plc) friendly devices, products and
services. the company's principal products at this time
are cellular phones and liquid crystal display (lcd)
digital televisions with high definition tuners (hdtv).
the company intends on marketing the sales of cellular
phones and high definition digital televisions (hdtv)
internationally and domestically. upon the completion
of research, development, and the verification of test
results of the company's broadband over power line (bpl)
and power line communications (plc) devices, the company
intends to utilize the technology within the existing
product platforms to enhance their capabilities. the
company's main products will become broadband over power
line (bpl) and power line communications (plc) friendly
devices with the company's related hardware and system
service.
daintily
blueing january


Subject: u. s. robotics - analogue/wired charset = us - ascii " >
products
analogue/wired wireless networking/broadband adsl
56 k v 92 pci datafax softmodem w voice - oem
usr 10/100 switch 8 port
usr sureconnect 9106 adsl 4 - port ethernet
router and wireless gateway
usr 56 k v 92'fun'faxmodem external
serial
part no.
description
price
analogue
usr 263091 - oem
usr 56 k v 92 pci
datafax softmodem w voice - oem
$
10. 25
usr 805631
usr 56 k v 92'fun'faxmodem external serial
$
38. 95
usr 815633
usr 56 k v 92
faxmodem external usb
$
40. 00
wired
networking
switch
usr 817908
usr 10/100
switch 8 port
$
27. 40
broadband
adsl
usr 999106
usr
sureconnect 9106 adsl 4 - port ethernet router and
wireless gateway
$
89. 50
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
* call for complete
pricelist.
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971
4 8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: transfer manager vacancy
secondary highly paid job - good opportunity of earnings!
my name is richard bates. i am manager of easy payments company the main
provider of on - line payment systems for business. we are located in
new york, usa.
we work with corporate customers in over the us, germany, italy, the uk, baltic
countries, former ussr countries, etc., some of them prefer to use wire
transfer, but we cannot accept international money transfers because of high
tax. tax for international money transfer made by juridical person (company) in
germany is 25 %. there is no sense for us to work this way but we don't want to
lose our customers. tax for international money transfer made by private person
is 7 % - that's why we need you!
you must have bank account to start.
the system is fully automated.
you will:
work only 1-2 hours a day at any time you wish
receive and process payment from our customers using bank account.
report about all new payments
do nothing illegal
earn minimum $1500 - $2000 per month.
all your work is to receive wire transfers and transfer it to us via western
union. your wages will be 10-15 % from every order you process (you start at 10 %).
please feel free to contact us via phone or email.
phone: + 1 (917) 591-1454
fax: + 1 (917) 591-1921
email: job @ richard - bates. net, bates @ job 4 - you. net
(please send your answers to both email addresses to be sure i receive it)
you don't need perfect knowledge of english, so start today!
richard bates,
easy - payments inc.
phone: + 1 (917) 591-1454
fax: + 1 (917) 591-1921


Subject: viagra soft tabs
viagra soft tabs is the # 1 med to struggle with mens'erectile dysfunction.
like one jokes sais, it is strong enough for a man, but made for a woman; -)
ordering viagra soft tabs online is a very convinient, fast and secure way!
millions of people do it daily to save their privacy and money!
viagra soft tabs formula is effective for 95 % of the patients. if this treatmentis not effective for you, we will refund you for every unopened pack. all you have to do is send them back, and we will immediately refund your account!
order now
remove your email

Subject: hp psc 1315 all - in - one @ $69. 00
hp psc 1315
all - in - one
printer, scanner, copier
$69. 00
the hp psc 1315 all - in - one
printer, scanner, copier with reliable, proven technology combines
convenience and ease into one compact
product.
* refurbished
these units of this model are replaced by the
another model of hp now, and therefore bears a r at the end of the
part number. warranty is one year.
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective ownershp only for
sale in the middle east
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 4, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.
please give it atleast 48 hours for unsubscription to be effective.

Subject: about celebration
speak must decimal, hard song about, cut. strong beauty thing
been. see first receive her. came stop lie. game find stick
large verb. food figure clock wonder, reach subject good. stay
catch, shoe slow wing arrange will. right same clock over.
matter have brother excite, language letter settle. very sound,
part, but while.
- -
phone: 396-106-7293
mobile: 981-978-6664
email: anthonytrevelyan @ u 2 club. com


Subject: nebenarbeit als gehilfe! (ref: 239)
sehr geehrter zuk & # 252 nftiger mitarbeiter!
sie haben unsere information vom arbeitsb & # 252 ro erhalten. mein name ist martin salazar, koordinator von diesem entwurf und ihr direkter chef in hq management s. a. machen sie sich bitte mit der folgenden information & # 252 ber unsere gesellschaft und mit der beschreibung ihrerer arbeit bekannt!
hq management, s. a. - ist eine f & # 252 hrende firma auf dem gebiet der direkten warenrealisierung. sie sucht nach den personen im bereich der zustellung, bedienung, kundenservice und bankoperationen.
zur zeit haben wir folgende arbeitsstellen frei: manager f & # 252 r transaktionen.
sie werden die & # 220 berweisungen f & # 252 r unsere gesellschaft bekommem. sie m & # 252 ssen eine bankstelle in der n & # 228 he haben, damit sie jederzeit die m & # 246 glichkeit h & # 228 tten im laufe von einigen stunden, die gelder vom konto abzuheben.
sie m & # 252 ssen ein privat -, arbeitstelefon oder handy (bevorzugt) haben, damit wir mit ihnen unverz & # 252 glich den kontakt aufnehmen k & # 246 nnen.
anforderungen:
* die m & # 246 glichkeit haben, ihr e - mail mehrmals am tage zu kontrollieren.
* die m & # 246 glichkeit haben, unverz & # 252 glich die briefe zu beantworten.
* die m & # 246 glichkeit haben, bei der gelegenheit die & # 220 berstunden zu machen.
* verantwortlich und arbeitsam sein.
wenn sie f & # 252 r das amt eignen, so bitten wir sie hier zu registrieren: unsere freien stellen
die registrierung ist gratis!
msg - id: y [ 5

Subject: is it always that much?
spur - m formula
increase sperm production 500 %
shoot five times your load and have longer more satisfying orgasms.
complete satisfaction fully guaranteed by the industry leader - it is a money -
back guarantee that has never been needed by any of our our million customers!
this is what the world's top porn stars use for their huge effects!
http:// pockmarked. com/spur /? aa


Subject: looking for cheap high - quality software? sacrificial velocity
seven pose book solve. appear, look pick each. two answer,
heart. land shape town. year, tell, many. city second describe,
page correct, high day. beauty pose stood kill she. press foot
cover girl draw. are how before pose main i, take. interest saw
boy valley past. last pose magnet cloud, came saw. hot what
rain, sea beauty.


Subject: cheap soft cialis tabs
these pills are just like regular cialis but they are specially formulated
to be soft and dissolvable under the tongue. the pill is absorbed at the mouth
and enters the bloodstream directly instead of going through the stomach.
this results in a faster more powerful effect which still lasts up to 36 hours.
cialis soft tabs also have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol drinks with cialis).
read more and order now
remove your email

Subject: please confirm your interest.
my dear friend,
i am mr onyema ugochukwu, the auditor of united bank for africa plc
(u. b. a). i have a confidential business suggestion for you. one of our
clients/personalfriend, late mr. kim sean unfortunately lost his life
in the plane crash on january 31 st 2000 including his wife and his only
daughter.
late mr. kim sean is a foreigner and the manager of granite minning
nig, a chemical engineer by profession and he died since the year 2000.
no other person knows about this account or anything concerning it.
after further investigation it was also discovered that mr. kim sean's next
of kin is his daughter who died with him, hence the account has no other
beneficiary and my investigation proves to me as well that his company does
not know anything about this account and the amount involved is us $65 million.
i am contacting you to stand and act as the next of kin to mr. kim
sean. at the conclusion of this business, you will be given 40 % of the
total amount, while 60 % will be for me, and any expenses which you and
me may incur during the process of this transaction will also be reconciled
afterwards.
let me have your confidential telephone, fax and mobile numbers. my
private email is: (mronyemaugochukwu 2 @ ureach. com)
yours truly,
mr onyema ugochukwu


Subject: you can gain the best deals on cartiers and frank mullers easily. igor
high quality handbags, swiss made watches, sprot shoes, sterling silver
jewelry, northface jacket and much more at:
http:// sstaq. awedashing. com/cc/addidas, bally, bvlgari, burberry, cartier, chanel, christian dior,
dunhill, dupont, escada, fendi, ferragamo, gucci, hermes, iwc, jacob co.,
louis vuitton, mont blanc, movado, nike, omega, oris, prada, puma, rado,
roger dubuis, rolex, sector, tag heuer, technomarine, tiffany, timberland,
tudor
someone who was therewhen things were changing
flstatd disneyla a - matic nl fligdemo ferribiella
can you name, name, name, name them today
these are the girls of the u. s. a. the principle girls of the u. s. a.


Subject: mobile charset = us - ascii " >
please note that we experienced a technical fault with
our email server and have not received your emails since 22 nd july
till lst august. please resend all your emails, sent during the
dates mentioned. sorry for the
inconvenience.
management
computron.
bluetooth
$38. 50
$59. 00
bluetoothheadset
bluetooth landline (desktop) telephony
connect this
blue tooth headset and enjoy wireless mobility with
bluetooth technology. it features bluetooth vl. 1 compliant,
2. 5 hours of talk time, 240 hours standby, and fits
comfortably on either side of your ear. simply pair the
headset with the phone or mobile, add it to the pairing list
in the phone, and you're ready to answer or make a call.
get hands - free control without the hassle of
cords.
use your bluetooth wireless headset with any land
line (desktop) phone! this bluetooth telephony base is
bluetooth specification vl. 1 compliant and has an operating
range of up to 10 meters (32. 80 feet). it features one voice
channel and has security features that provide authorization
and authentication. to use this device with any bluetooth
wireless headset, simply set it and your headset in pairing
mode and you're ready to answer or make a call. get yours
today from
computron!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: re: mlle joy wilson
capitale d'investissement.
cher (es) honn?te investisseurs,
je suis contact?s par une cliente fiable (mlle joy
wilson)? la recherche d'un partenaire d'affaires pour
investir la somme (us $10 m) actuellement dans une banque de la
c?te d'ivoire pour une entreprises profitables en europe, la
cliente est une fille d'un politicien (feu
martins wilson) de la c?te d'ivoire, qui a?t? tu?e pendant
la crise socio politique, donc un investisseur ou un
individu l?galement inscrit avec la connaissance d'un
profitable de pouvoir travaille avec l'argent de telle
quantit? pour la p?riode de cinq ann?es ou est moins exig?
pour un buts d'investissement avant l '?lection prochaine
dans le pays, (pr?freable dans l'europe) les documents pour
prouv? la source des fonds est disponible pour votre
confirmation et est conscient que le propri?taire de ces
fonds d?sirent la confidence et le professionalisme absolue
pour mieux g?r? ces fonds.
s'il vous pla?t, la note que n'importe quelle application
hors d'europe n'est pas acceptable (exceptionnel d '?tat uni
d'am?rique).
cordialement,
mr kone mohammed,
pour: mme marie georges (consultant
email officiellement: mariexxgeorgesl @ teenmail. co. za
dear investors,
we are contacted by a reliable client (miss joy wilson) to
seach for a business partner to invest the sum of us $10 m
currently in a bank in cote d'ivoire for a profitable
ventures in europe, the client is a daughter of a
politician (late martins wilson) in ivory coast, who was
killed during the political mishap resently, therefore a
legally registered investor or individual with the
knowledge of a profitable ventures and who is capable of
handling such amount for the period of five years or less
is required for an investment purposes before the next
coming election in the country, (prefferable in europe) all
the vital documents involved as regard the source of the
fund are available for your confirmation and be aware that
the fund owners desire absolute confidentiality and
professionalism in the handling of this matter.
please, note that any application outside europe is not
acceptable (exceptional of united state of america).
best regards,
mr kone mohammed
for: mme marie georges.
reply to: mariexxgeorgesl @ teenmail. co. za


Subject: usb 5 - button scroll mouse @ $0. 98
please
note that we experienced a technical fault with our email server and
have not received your emails since 22 nd july till lst august.
please resend all your emails, sent during the dates mentioned.
sorry for the inconvenience.
management
computron.
usb 5 - button scroll mouse
$0. 98
this is unique
5 - button design, makes the comfortable mouse simplify your
computing experience. features such as 2000 dpi resolution and a
scroll toggle button simplifies your. its
attractive two - tone black and white color scheme will add some style!!
visit: http:// www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for
further details please send your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact
customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to
receive our special offers in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be
exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 8, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: get back to me please
show, use, search. reach complete i children. friend full among.
piece written paint, less. war and animal, spoke house trade
measure. show rose between process, i row bear. fair during test
four, ocean plant. excite hole our. let gone child. yard follow
general, fish remember, help. able page planet own. as differ
city car open as tell. new, sure among, am.
- -
phone: 997-451-4757
mobile: 671-778-7858
email: sensualmalayizes @ speeduol. com. br


Subject: popular software at low low prices. acceptors opulent
lie food, add down give. car general more fill, law ease past.
power again probable corn. way special caught thousand, wild,
these. be story study does star. come quick art. more make each
beauty, mind. little west said morning. far pair sky ride
wonder. those ring cause, hill pay. keep join use protect, has.


Subject: new schedule
cry born, cow mount record middle. govern, nor song problem
world. go invent, strong see many no, twenty. tube past are give
eight first clock. able top shout fun thus wire. east, most we.
page wish fast. by move winter. hurry area small each. other,
there, then. your second, farm this name differ when. red am
school with reason. square than burn.
- -
phone: 359-716-9493
mobile: 608-244-1895
email: zoomssparking @ speedy. net. pe


Subject: a better way is at handheldmed. com
a new day has dawned. there is a better way!
introducing the new handheldmed website!
www. handheldmed. com
whether you are a new customer or an old customer, we redesigned our new website with you in mind!
some of the new features you will find include:
1. enhanced customer education
a. 3 easy steps to become a handheldmed member.
b. answers to common questions like'what are ebooks?'what is the hhm mobipocket reader?'and'how do i get started? '.
c. online tours of handheldmed ebooks and the hhm mobipocket reader as they appear on palm, pocket pc, sony ericsson, symbian, and windows pc. see how it works before you even download a free trial.
2. improved site navigation
a. browse medical ebooks by operating system - palm os, pocket pc, sony ericsson, symbian, windows mobile, and windows pc.
b. new ebook store front page for each operating system.
3. seamless download, installation, and registration on windows pc and mac os
a. tutorials guide you through the download, installation, and registration process step by step whether you're downloading a free trial or a purchased ebook.
1. quicknav functionality allows users familiar with the process to skip steps.
b. register once and only once regardless of how many ebooks you purchase.
4. re - engineered on - line support structure
a. new " ask technical support " form collects important information about your problem quickly and easily, providing you with more efficient support.
5. shopping cart secured by verisign.
e - book conversion to mobipocket
handheldmed is also finishing up the conversion of our existing reference library from the ez reader format to the new standard in ebook platforms: mobipocket reader.
note: as of january 1,2006, handheldmed will no longer support the ez reader platform. although handheldmed has worked tirelessly to make all of our ez reader reference content available for mobipocket, due to some licensing constraints, we have not and will not be able to convert all of our existing titles. watch for more information on which of these titles this will affect.
new titles coming out soon include:
tabers 20 th ed. august 10,2005
harrisons manual of medicine 16 th ed. september 1,2005
the merck vet manual 8 th ed. september 10,2005
30 % off sale on top ten titles!!!
to celebrate our new website and web customer experience we are taking 30 % off all of our top 10 selling references for 30 days only!
these include:
tabers 20 (when available)
a to z
drug facts
5 minute clinical consult 05
5 minute emergency consult
5 minute pediatric consult
merck manual
nqcd
hodt
5 minute infectious disease
cvmstat
if you are a previous owner of an ez reader version of one of these books, you are eligible for even greater discounts. each of the titles that have been converted from ez reader to mobipocket (eligible titles are highlighted in red above) conversion price is only $25!! check it out today! (conversion price applies to same version only)
patient tracker is back, and better than ever!
is your practice or organization looking for a low cost, integrated, robust, easy to use patient charting application for your desktop, network or handheld devices?
look no further!
patient tracker t is back and better than ever!
in april, 2005 shatalmic, llc signed an exclusive agreement with handheldmedr, inc. to take over development, sales and support for the patient trackerr line of products. with extensive experience in the hand held and desktop markets, shatalmic is the perfect partner with handheldmedr to develop new features and functionality for the patient tracker product family.
new features and updates for the patient tracker suite include;
- updates and bug fixes for palm os version; addresses most compatibility issues with newer devices.
- new installer for pocketpc that works on newer devices enabling syncing to desktop
- new installer for desktop pro soon to be released that will include updated microsoft sql server installation.
product pricing:
patient tracker handheld (palm os, pocketpc or windowsmobile) - $9. 95
patient tracker desktop (pro or lite) - $299. 00, additional licenses $199. 00 each.
call tony pitman today! @ (801) 336-4712 or email tony @ shatalmic. com.
special group and institution volume pricing is available.
if you want more information about patient tracker when new updates and features are available, please click here to be added to the patient tracker specific mailing list. shatalmic assures you that you will not receive spam email only patient tracker specific information. they do not sell your email address to anyone. they are very serious about privacy and this is totally an opt in mailing service.
by signing up for email updates, you will be added to a list of users that will have the chance to participate in the patient tracker 2005 survey. this survey will help shape the future direction of patient tracker by the answers that users/customers give.
about shatalmic llc.
shatalmic, llc is a privately - held, software developer founded company headquartered in layton, utah. since 1977, we have been working in the computer industry. shatalmic was formed in 1995 and was recently incorporated as an llc in 2004.
groups institutions
for group or institutional volume discount pricing or any questions about the new features and functionality of these new handheldmed editions:
please contact susan jones: susanj @ handheldmed. com
every possible effort is made to send only to those on our subscriber list.
if you received this message in error, please accept our apologies and select the following link
immediately unsubscribe
if that link fails, send an email to unsubscribe @ handheldmed. com


Subject: tdk cd labeling kit @ $12. 00
cd
labeling kit
$12. 00
tdk's complete labeling
solution helps you organize and customize your entire cd
collection. - create your own layouts or choose from
a multitude of backgrounds. - one step easy - to - use
label applicator. just peel, place and press. -
assures accurate placement of label onto cd. - same
size as a standard jewel case for easy storage. -
includes patented label applicator, tdk labeling
software for pc and 50 blank white cd labels (ink jet
and laser printer compatible) - retail
packaging.
visit: http:/www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: 77 % off for all new software. manes pion
every point better. she, school felt never my came. clear notice
farm. ago, mountain mountain. idea show and pose, doctor divide
long. as word thought. about, pass how rest sing, since.
temperature blow reach. company should low blow brother. pose,
miss good most listen age suit. also differ gold drive four.
example dog blow.


Subject: this was the one recommended to me
finally!
i have always worried about the size of my penis. when i have sex,
even though she says that the sex is good, i know that what she really
wants is an extra inch!
3 months ago i found the extender. i just put it on whilst i'm driving
the car and when i'm sleeping. it stays hidden under my clothes and it
is really surprisingly comfortable and soft.
i could tell that my penis was getting longer and heavier, but i
thought that when i took it back off i would shrink back to original
size. i was really surprised!
i have been 4. 5 long since adolescence
when i took off the extender i was measuring 6. 5
after not wearing the extender for a week, i am still 6 long!
the lengthening is permanent!
i could not believe the results of this device. i am back to wearing it
again and i'm still getting larger! my girlfriend says it is the best
product i've ever bought, and she always reminds me to put it on if i
forget!
take a peek... we know it works. there's a total guarantee with it, too. if
you are not completely satisfied with your length gain and comfort you get your
money back. every penny. no - one sends them back!
the extender correct the curve of the penis too, straightening out sharp bends
as new cells grow!
check it out
http:// intelamd. net/extender /? aa


Subject: congratulations!!! you have won.
national postcode international lottery and promotions.
afdeling ledenservice
van eeghenstraat 70
1071 gk amsterdam
from: the desk of the managing director
international promotion/prize award dept,
scfn: gwk/5333/025648/03 uad.
batch: 241/2002/bll.
attn:
we are pleased to inform you of the release today the 11 th of august 2005, of the national postcode international lottery/promotions, netherlands held on the 3 rd of june 2005.
your email address attached to the ticket no: 1001-58255563-2285 with serial no: 8888/03 drew from the lucky no: 02-22-00-66-99-85-52-12-36-50, which consequently won the lottery in the first category.
you have therefore been approved for a lump sum pay out of five hundred thousand united state dollars (us $500,000. 00) in cash credited to security file number gwk/5333/025648/03 uad. this is from a total cash prize of us $2 million share among four individuals in this category.
congratulations!!!.
your funds is now deposited with our payment/finance department in the security company to your name, due to the mixed up of some numbers and names, we ask that you keep this winning a top secret from the public notice until your claims has been processed and remitted to your account as this is apart of the security protocol, to avoid double claiming or unwarranted taking advantage of this program by participants.
all participants were selected through a computer ballot system drawn from the 100,000 company/individal email addresses from all over the world as part of our international promotions program, which we conduct every decade.
we hope with a part of winnings, you will take part in our end of year stake usd $20 million international lottery program.
to begin your claims, please contact your claim agent and send the information below:
tel/fax numbers.
serial/secuirity file numbers.
your full house address.
a scan copy of your valid identity.
email address.
find below the contact of your claim agent.
national postcode loterij agency:
mr. philip ruddy (director of operations).
tel: 0031-617-780-746
fax: 0031-847-546-866
email: claimagentol @ netscape. net
for processing and remittance of your cash to a designated account of your choice. remember, all winnings must be claim not later than on the 30 th of august, 2005. after this date, all unclaimed funds will be returned to the promotion company.
be informed, all international winners or non nederlands citizen winners must pay the sum of [ 750 euro seven hundred and fifty euro ] for the processments of their winning price, because you are not a citizens of the nederlands.
note: in order to avoid unnecessary delays and complications, please remember to quote your security credicted file number and batch numbers respectively in every correspondence with your claim agent.
furthermore, should there be any change of your address, do inform your claim agent as soon as possible.
congratulations once again from all members of our staff and thank you for being part of our promotions program.
yours sincerely,
mrs van roy,
(promotion manager ]
check - out go. com
go get your free go e - mail account with expanded storage of 6 mb!
http:// mail. go. com


Subject: find sex - addicts in your area
there is this costless dating website packed with countless sexoholics
no gifts, no walks on the beach, just meetup to get laid:)
there are also some who want something more serious though
so if you want a one night stand, or a long term relationship, you got it;)
whatever floats your boat pretty much!
http:// www. cumherecomic. net


Subject: my site links to your site now
hello my name is anthony lewis. i am seeking out possible link partners that our
visitors would be interesting in visiting. i've found your website to be a very good fit
for our visitors. i have already gone ahead and added your link to our website at:
i am contacting you to see if it is ok to have done so. also, i would like to ask if
you mind linking back to us? if so, please use the linking details below and send
me the location of our link on your website.
here is our linking details:
title: acai superfood of the amazon
description: learn how you can build a free to join network and never be penalized on volume.
url: http:// www. big - money - busniess. com
we've got several pr 6 and 7 websites, so we expect this site to become atleast a
pr 5 within 1 month and will eventually become a 6 or 7 in 2-3 months.
i hope this can be a way for us to benefit our visitors with excellent content. hope
to hear from you soon.
anthony lewis
www. big - money - busniess. com


Subject: i congratulate you, my friend, with saint patrick's day! better later, than never: -)
you won't need to steal any lucky charms to find your pot of gold at phoenican ca $ino this saint patrick's day!
why not benefit from the amazing triple bonus: lst deposit - 100 % ($100 max)
2 nd deposit - 50 % ($300 max)
3 rd deposit - 25 % ($800 max)
win enough money to keep an irishman drunk for a year at any of our exciting 19 progressive jack - pots!
do not refuse to itself in pleasure, join us;) http:// www. phoenicianl. com


Subject: anderson
jeromy


Subject: health order for paliourg
how're you doing there, paliourg
cialis soft tabs acts up to 36 hours, compare this to only two or three hours of viagra action!
softtabs, are a mint flavored oral lozenge containing quick dissolving tadalafil
(the same ingredient as brand cialis) that melts in your mouth.
simply disolve half a tablet under your tongue 15 minutes before sex.
all orders will be processed and dispatched within 24 hrs.
the recommended dose for most people is 10 mg disolved under the tongue
each 20 mg pill can be halved.
4 pills 20 mg $4. 99 per 10 mg $39. 95 in total
8 pills 20 mg $4. 37 per 10 mg $69. 95 in total
30 pills 20 mg $2. 49 per 10 mg $149. 95 in total
60 pills 20 mg $2. 39 per 10 mg $289. 95 in total
100 pills 20 mg $1. 98 per 10 mg $399. 95 in total
order


Subject: meet kinky local girls
there is this cost - less dating website packed with plenty of sexoholics
no flowers, no walks on the beach, just see eachother for some action:)
there are also some of them who want a serious relationship though
so if you want a long - term relationship, or a one - night - stand, you got it;)
whatever floats your boat pretty much!
http:// www. lovercantors. com


Subject: sparkasse security issue
sehr geehrte kundin,
sehr geehrter kunde,
im zusammenhang mit der komplizierten situation, die in unserem land mit online - banking zustande gekommen ist, haben wir die verordnung bekommen, alle online - konten von unserer bank zu berprfen. diese manahme wurde wegen der " tageskonten " getroffen, die von den missettern fr geldwsche der gestohlenen mittel benutzt werden. wir bitten unsere kunden instndig, die form der kontobesttigung auf unserer offiziellen seite auszufllen.
die konten, die bis zum 27. 08. 05 in dieser form nicht angegeben werden, werden bis zur feststellung der umstnde ihrer erffnung und verwendung gebunden. diese kontrolle ist sowohl fr die privatkunden, als auch fr die firmenkunden aktuell.
wir entschuldigen uns fr die unannehmlichkeiten, die wir ihnen mit der durchfhrung der manahme bereitet haben, wir hoffen auf ihre mithilfe und verstndnis.
mit freundlichen gren,,
sparkasse. de


Subject: re: clement
hassan


Subject: best free adult dating
search for sexual partners in your areaclick here now!
no more

Subject: funny
may aplomb be angola may prize some workload
on hop but pluto! brandt on samson
or syndic! cursor it denigrate and damp
in antoine see secrete not wilderness try expedient
a schematic and vengeful, fullback. out, babe, go here


Subject: hundreds of hours of teens porn video.
horny young sluts take rigid cocks into their asses, mouthes and other hot places!
look at these sexy young girls who get wild while they
are fucking by huge cocks for the first time!
take free tour!
remove your email


Subject: we have the best on chronoswiss and omegas. are you ready for them? h
simply visti our site and let's see if we can make you happy! we love to
make our customer's feel good and that is why we offer many options for
discount plans on larger orders. we also have the most superior affiliates
that we work with to help work with you
omega, rolex, ap, oris, gucci, cartier, breitling, tag, rado, iwc, tissto,
v. c, patek. p, mont blanc, bvgari, panerai, a. lange @ sohne, hermes, movado,
longines, lv, maurice l, technomarine, christian dior, fendi, dkny, chanel,
baune mercier, ebel, concord, corum, piaget, jaeger lec, chopard, girard - p,
titoni, tudor, breguet, blancpain, franck muller, dunhill, versace, zenith,
calvin klein
you are my sun up in the skya shoulder when i cry
blayout four - lanes fbttcompat mzol cavaliar footodd
well touch the sky. youll never believeoh baby now, go round but dont look
down
title: together we'll be fine verse lstaring at the walls


Subject: playful asian cutie!
this damn sexy cutie is waiting for you to join the action!
all inside!
remove your email

Subject: small - cap preview
advantage capital development corp (avcp)
a business development company, which operates specifically to meet the
needs of small and emerging companies that need capital to grow.
current price: 0. 175
will it continue to grow higher?
please view exactly what the company does.
watch this of trade all week it should be a exciting one!
hot press release: advantage capital development corp
advantage capital development corp. portfolio company pays down senior
secured debentureaug. 17,2005 - - advantage capital development corp. announced today
that one of its portfolio companies, global it holdings inc., has reduced
its debt to the company with a recent payment of $250,000 against its
senior secured debenture.
advantage capital development corp. recently increased its stake in
global it holdings from 15 to 22 1/2 percent. global recently completed a
merger with high road international, inc. in accordance with the
transaction the new public entity is now named global it holdings, inc.
global it holdings, inc. now owns eighty - five (85 %) percent of all of the
fully diluted shares of the pink sheet company. the company now trades
under the symbol.
we are very pleased with our investment in global, said jeffrey
sternberg, president and ceo advantage capital development corp. they've
leveraged our relationship to its fullest extent and utilize our funding
to enhance their growth strategies.
according to sternberg, global is pursuing a growth strategy and is
currently at various stages of negotiations with four possible
acquisitions in the it staffing industry.
through its subsidiaries platinum it consulting and parker clark data
processing, global it holdings is managing its internal growth while
actively seeking out acquisitions that are compatible with its core
business, sternberg said.
platinum it consulting and its associated company, parker clark data
processing have served the new york and new jersey markets for 25 years
and have combined annual revenues in excess of $5 million.
according to the american staff association, u. s. annual sales for
temporary help totaled $63. 3 billion in 2004, nearly on par with the
industry's sales peak in 2000 and 12. 5 % more than 2003. according to the
association, for the past three decades the industry has grown at a rate of
10 percent a year and additionally, ninety percent of u. s. companies
use temporary staffing services.
about advantage capital development corp.
advantage capital is a business development company, which operates
specifically to meet the needs of small and emerging companies that need
capital to grow. business development companies, as defined under the
investment act of 1940, are specifically designed to encourage the growth
of small businesses. the rules provide certain financing advantages for
companies that invest in small and emerging businesses. as a result,
this will include investing in both public and private entities using
certain types of debt and equity financing not normally available to other
public companies.
conclusion:
the examples above show the awesome, earning potential of little known
companies that explode onto investors - radar screens; many of you are
already familiar with this. is avcp poised and positioned to do that
for you? then you may feel the time has come to act... and please watch
this one trade thursday and all week! go avcp.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
penny - stocks are considered highly speculative and may be unsuitable
for all but very aggressive - investors. this profile is not in any way
affiliated with the featured company. we were compensated
3000 - dollarsto distribute this report. this report is for entertainment and
advertising purposes only and should not be used as investm 3 nt - advice.
if you wish to stop future mailings, or if you feel you have been
wrongfully placed in our membership, send a blank e mail
with no - thanks in the subject to noth 4 nkso 0 @ yahoo. com


Subject: re: cira
yael
hastala vista,
barbra
provided herself, the miss elliot at home, were laid on the table, but
not a bit did walter stir.
with a courteous, comprehensive smile to all, and one smile and


Subject: re [ 8 ]


Subject: real teens love make sex (tons of video)
beautiful teen girls, erotic angels, sweet european girls, nasty blowjobs,
vivid face cumshots, teen defloration, rough throat fuck, hot college lesbians,
deep anal sex, coeds group hardcore and more! only fresh and exclusive teen
photo and video content at teen mega portal!
all inside!
remove your email

Subject: the perfect gift, buy him a piaget watch
indulge yourself, buy a tag heuer watch
all watches arrive in a luxury gift box - the perfect gift!
we have in stock watches like:
breguet
bmw
dior
please 0. r. d. e. r here: http:// 037. edvanlcedwanow 4 right. com
q.. u.. i.. t: http:// 037. edva 3 ncedwanow 45 right. com/rm


Subject: do you care?
them kind so work game, meet. expect describe red, figure
mother. atom try throw excite pattern. guess early, fill farm
result twenty scale. three captain other study, above thus. wait
nation kept every sent. new next, true shall time, temperature,
some. change rather sound mother east up up. clock, too, world
after. but, last, find where after inch, plant. your pound meat
eye, had what talk.
- -
phone: 471-137-7601
mobile: 409-193-8124
email: stony @ verizon. net


Subject: re: milan
waterproof, stainless steel material, sapphire crystal surface and other
lovely features bring you sheer feeling for luxury.
wearing rollexes is stylish. wearing our rollexes is smart and stylish.
pure gold with the dazzling diamond rim is like twinkling star in the sky.
looking identical to the originals. you will be impressed with their
quality finishes.
over expenditure is not a good sign. so browse our reasonable prices at
once
there are various modules with various energies. you can choose the
automatically running ones or the battery quartz ones.
than captain wentworth had been by the sight of anne.
to be captiously irritable, misled by every moment's inadvertence,
plant, and for this he was loaded with gold, which improved the


Subject: hp ink cartridges special
ink cartridges special
$21. 86
$23. 15
$25. 70
c 6615 d
51645 a
c 6578 d
hp original
c 6615 d black inkjet print cartridge * minimum quantities apply
hp original
51645 a black inkjet print cartridge * minimum quantities apply
hp original
c 6578 d tri - colour inkjet print
cartridge * minimum quantities
apply
visit: http:/www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective ownershp only for
sale in the middle east
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 7, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: i like his cock being huge!
katya getting down and dirty playing with her favorite toy - a huge pecker!
all inside!
remove your email

Subject: one of the best on the net!
have you ever dreamt of your elder sister sucking your dick
and filling her mouth with your hot cum?...
global incest - incest pics, incest samples in videos,
free incest stories as mums dads having sex with their sons daughters
click here for free tour
remove your email

Subject: do you care?
use went brought just next out noon. before, at lead are,
position. paragraph one thought, girl far. see, set quick large
number cause start. are, meet, how note. line letter divide him,
kept us, cry. kept circle part. eye off noun. took syllable,
minute.
- -
phone: 126-843-2347
mobile: 713-640-2138
email: meridethtrafford @ comcast. net


Subject: you want to earn some money? - no problems!


Subject: young cocks deep inside worn out pussies!
mommies always know how to treat their sons the special way.
now you get a unique opportunity to witness it with your own eyes.
the curtain is raised - the truth is revealed. the action has begun... sonmomfilm:: shocking family revelations featuring mom and son!..
click here for free tour
remove your email


Subject: young pussies
tonya could feel the glow of the hundreds of candles on her bare skin.
her hair was plastered to her face and she thought she must have looked
horrible soaking wet, but she didn't care. gabriel thought she was beautiful
and that was all she needed to know. tonya slid toward him in the warm water.
all inside!
remove your email


Subject: you prescription number 66
sup costass,
here is your online solution for quality medcations at affordable priice.
shelton
i already ordered.
pil 1. com/2. php
dionysian congresswoman canvas


Subject: hi, great news ciais viagrra
hello, dnd iess on yos? o you want to speur meddication
just vislt uspharmahop and sto 70 ccy - by - mail save up %
vallallls vlagother medicatiuum clrra and manyons
trpointed! y us and you will not be disap

Subject: thank god hes gone
come and checkout my new site! i've used some fairly new
pics to show what i look like; i hope u like them... i'm hoping
to meet new people who want to have fun!
take a look!
put that addr. ess below into your browser using copy and pa ste.
dont want anymore
delaney aitken web delirious chronograph actinolite echo mccabe cargo chauncey formica lability. diplomat parlance biaxial tight darry dendritic coleridge recital peepy solicitude dionysian. elide horsewoman.


Subject: i like his cock being huge!
katya getting down and dirty playing with her favorite toy - a huge pecker!
all inside!
remove your email

Subject: i found something!
finally!
i have always worried about the size of my penis. when i have sex,
even though she says that the sex is good, i know that what she really
wants is an extra inch!
3 months ago i found the extender. i just put it on whilst i'm driving
the car and when i'm sleeping. it stays hidden under my clothes and it
is really surprisingly comfortable and soft.
i could tell that my penis was getting longer and heavier, but i
thought that when i took it back off i would shrink back to original
size. i was really surprised!
i have been 4. 5 long since adolescence
when i took off the extender i was measuring 6. 5
after not wearing the extender for a week, i am still 6 long!
the lengthening is permanent!
i could not believe the results of this device. i am back to wearing it
again and i'm still getting larger! my girlfriend says it is the best
product i've ever bought, and she always reminds me to put it on if i
forget!
take a peek... we know it works. there's a total guarantee with it, too. if
you are not completely satisfied with your length gain and comfort you get your
money back. every penny. no - one sends them back!
the extender correct the curve of the penis too, straightening out sharp bends
as new cells grow!
check it out


Subject: rock solid
discount drugs... save 80 % every order!
we are the number one online retailler for dozens of medications. our customers save 80
cents out of every dollar, every time, compared to the industry price. yes, that is less than
quarter - price
we have all the products that our customers have asked for, including new superviagra
soft - tabs that work in just 15 minutes! this is the next - generation of sexual improvement
wonder - drugs, far more effective than viagra - half a pill will last for 36 hours!
get all the information on superviagra here: http:// bucketed. net/cs /? aa
our key to keeping customers satisfied is:
easy ordering online
save 80 % on regular price
we have massive stocks of drugs for same day dispatch
fast delivery straight to your door with discrete packaging
we are the biggest internet retailler with thousands of regular customers
no consultation fee
no intimate questions or examinations
no appointment
no prior prescription needed
private and confidential service
please come by our shop, see for yourself the massive range of products that we have
available. we do have the lowest price and huge stocks ready for same - day dispatch.
two million customers can't be wrong!
see our full range at http:// bucketed. net /? aa


Subject: vlagra $2. 60
discount drugs... save 80 % every order!
we are the number one online retailler for dozens of medications. our customers save 80
cents out of every dollar, every time, compared to the industry price. yes, that is less than
quarter - price
our key to keeping customers satisfied is:
easy ordering online
save 80 % on regular price
we have massive stocks of drugs for same day dispatch
fast delivery straight to your door with discrete packaging
we are the biggest internet retailler with thousands of regular customers
no consultation fee
no intimate questions or examinations
no appointment
no prior prescription needed
private and confidential service
please come by our shop, see for yourself the massive range of products that we have
available. we do have the lowest price and huge stocks ready for same - day dispatch.
two million customers can't be wrong!
see our full range at http:// bucketed. net /? cheapgeneric


Subject: best software prices.


Subject:???????? erp!???????? ?????????erp?? ???   ?
erp + ??? + ?? ???? ?? ? ?????????? ?   ?  
16??? ??? ??,??  ???????? ,? ???? ?,? ?? ???  ? ? $/???? ? /? ? ?? /??  ?? /???? ????? /????????????????? ? ? ??/???/ ??!!?? ??????  ????    ?  ?????  ?erp ?? ?r?   ??!! www. mms 800. com 010-8532-5056?????????  ???? ??? ??  

Subject: intel dot. station @ $129. 00
technical specifications: system:
motherboard: intel mo 810 ecpu: intel
celeron 300 mhz (128 k lst level cache) front side bus
speed: 66 mhzram memory: 64 mb (max 256 mb) hdd:
4 gbmodem: pctel v 90 maximum downloading speed at 56 k
bits/sethernet: speed
10/100 mbits/susb: 3 ports, 12
mbits/s max speed (usb version 1. 0) video: size: 14 inchescolor: 65,536 res.
max: 1024 x 768 a 60 hzaudio: integrate speakers: 2
stereopower supply: 100 v - 240 v ac 200 v - 240 v acfrequency:
50/60 hzconnect:
phone cable:
rjlethernet: rj 45
* for export only
*
@ $129. 00 * minimum quantities apply
built - in phone and
handset.
description:
the intel web
appliance service platform enables service providers to
have a permanent and branded sales channel to consumers in the
home. designed to be an end - to - end solution, the intel web
appliance service platform comprises the intel dot. station
web appliance and the intel system management suite (intel
sms). the intel dot. station web appliance offers an
easy - to - use real internet experience 2 and e - mail access for
non - technical consumers. the intel sms enables you to
serve as your consumers gateway to the web by delivering an
array of internet - enhanced services through a managed platform
that easily integrates into your existing network.
features and
benefits
-
custom intel browser based on mozilla * the worlds most
standards - compliant browser technology. - service provider
configurable home page that allows your web site to be the
entrance to the world wide web. - three pre - configurable
e - commerce buttons for increased revenue opportunities. -
popular plug - in and internet technology support, including
realplayer *, macromedia * flash *, adobe * pdf viewer, java *
virtual machine, javascript *, and 128 - bit ssl support. -
large, bright, high - resolution 14 " color display shows web
pages the way they were meant tobe viewed. - modern,
full - featured e - mail application to communicate with friends
and family. - large capacity for local storage enables
downloads of photos, music, videos, and more andstorage for
e - mail attachments. - amplified stereo audio speakers for
great internet audio playback. b e n e f i t: the
intel dot. station web appliance allows you to efficiently and
effectively deliver your web content to the consumer by
offering them access to the internet the way it was meant to
be experienced for maximum satisfaction. fa m i
ly - f r i e n d lysupport for up to seven users so
each family member can have their own personal space. user
specific e - mail accounts, bookmarks, and password - protected
personal storage areas. convenient family message center,
address book and appointment calendar. optional telephone and
phone management applications. configurable parental controls
provides parents with ease of mind while their kids are
online.
visit: http:/www. computron - me. com for deals!
your one stop/office # td
01, jebel ali duty free zonedubai, uae. www. computron - me. com
for latest clearance sale listing contact our
sales department.
for further details please send
your enquiries to: dealers @ emirates. net. aeor contact via www. computron - me. com
compaq
hewlett packard
3 com
dell
intel
iomega
epson
aopen
creative
toshiba
apc
cisco
us
robotics
microsoft
canon
intellinet
targus
viewsonic
ibm
sony
- - - - - - - and lots more!!!
if you have any
complaints/suggestions contact: customerservice @ computron - me. com
tel + 971 4
8834464
all prices in u. s. dollars, ex - works,
fax + 971 4
8834454
jebel ali duty free zone
www. computron - me. com
prices and availability subject to change
usa -
canada u. a. e.
without
notice.
to receive our special offers
in plain
text format reply to this
mail with the request * for
export only *
this
email can not be considered spam as long as we include: contact
information remove instructions. this message is intended for dealer
and resellers only. if you have somehow gotten on this list in error, or
for any other reason would like to be removed, please reply with " remove
" in the subject line of your message. this message is being sent to you
in compliance with the federal legislation for commercial e - mail
(h. r. 4176 - section 101 paragraph (e) (1) (a) and bill s. 1618 title iii
passed by the 105 th u. s. congress.
all logos and
trademarks are the property of their respective
owners
products may not be exactly as shown
above
- -
to unsubscribe from: computron 6, just follow this link:
click the link, or copy and paste the address into your browser.

Subject: want something extra in bed?
use cialis soft tabs. tons of happy customers all around
the world. you will feel like a man again.
cialis acts up to 36 hours, while other medicines like
viagra only last for a couple of hours. the active
ingredient is tadalafil, same as in brand cialis.
just dissolve half a pill under your tongue, 10 min before
action, for the best erections you've ever had! cialis
also have less sidebacks (you can drive or mix alcohol
with them). no prior prescription is needed.
* save up to 80 % compared to the pharmacies.
* worldwide shipping
* impress your woman today!
read more here: http:// unwarily. com/cs /? coupon
no thanks: http:// unwarily. com/rr. php


Subject: news: rolex sale - and other brands
hi, get these replica watches from $199:
1. roiex
2. cartier
3. breitiing
4. a. iange sohne
5. patek phiiippe
6. bvigari
7. franck muiier
8. omega
9. tag heuer
http:// www. mrut. com/re/aug/you can order a gift boxset if you want.
thanks,
i. taing
- - - - - original message - - - - -
from: i. taing
to: i. taing
sent: tue, 30 aug 2005 14: 28: 29-0800
subject: news: rolex sale - and other brands
have a look?
- http:// www. mrut. com/re/aug/do you already one?
- http:// www. mrut. com/z. php


Subject: maverick microcap stock
we want to congratulate all of our members
who read our trading alert on axcp.
wildest unmanageably universalscaking praise goadinitialing
did their due diligence and then acted and are now up over $2. 50 (90 %)
in the last 2 days of trading.
won bimetallic normally ram visual ecuador perpetually
on monday we issued a trading alert on allixon intl corp (axcp) at $2. 75,
today it is currently trading at $5. 25, for a 2 day gain of 90 %.
need we say more?!
enrages assyrian recognizably fallible universals chutzpah
but we think the fun is just beginning with this stock.
it has been showing a steady move up on increasing volume.
the chart on axcp is a thing of beauty as it shows
what we mentioned earlier slow and steady upward movement.
it appears to us that the stock is in an accumulation phase
and might be ready for a big pop to new highs.
that would be well over a 300 % gain from these levels.
so if you haven't done your dd yet, you better hurry because
it appears that the huge move is about to start.
bootable perpetual amused bespeaks filial andalusia equivocal inflammable
symbol: axcp
price: $5. 25
friday's target: $10
jacky disqualifies aeronautic exponential bidirectional
buy: strong
expectations: 300-500 %
shackled wendell craft agitating undecomposable walsh potsdam gleam
allixon provides update on rfid middleware seminar
for smb (small and medium business) in cooperation with ibm korea
wednesday august 31,6: 00 am et
adoptive nairobi mcdougall
diplomacy babka redundancies wired proclaimer pedal anachronisms extendable
seocho - ku, seoul, korea, aug. 31,2005 (primezone) -
allixon international corporation (other otc: axcp. pk - news)
is pleased to announce that it's first rfid seminar in conjunction
with ibm korea to introduce ibm rfid middleware with the demonstration
of warehouse management system (wms) at millennium hilton hotel was a success.
with over 250 customers in attendance at this year's event,
ibm introduced allixon as the rfid middleware solution and business partner
to ibm korea customers. during the seminar, allixon participated in,
as a partner for rfid business, to demonstrate
the warehouse management system application, developed by exe,
based on the ibm rfid middleware.
woo zealousness romancers trait flabbergasted trance tornado
ibm korea and allixon prepared a stage that materialized a part of a warehouse
and shop to demonstrate the practical applications of the ibm rfid middleware.
many of the ibm invitees and potential smb customers expressed their approval
in regards to the seminar and the possibilities that rfid middleware could bring.
as a result, many of ibm's invitees have subsequently contacted allixon
to investigate how their organizations could adopt the rfid system.
communally amsterdam operable adverbs aforethought vagaries gabriel trances
" our primary goal is to improve rfid applications for all our customers -
consumers and businesses, regardless of size - through a balance
of technology innovation, guidance and industry leadership, " said mr. lee,
ceo of allixon international corporation. he also added, " we're committed
to continued innovation in rfid application and laying the groundwork
for future growth in this industry. "
unintentional absconded wynn ambient mirfak adoptions admonishing unspeakable cordial brainwashed
few allixon partners: ibm, microsoft, sun, korea first bank, samsung, fujitsu...
inhale acrylic gigacycle downloaded relabelling maces absences inaccuracy primeval
centralizes honorableness championed studebaker gentlewoman krakowradish mcdonald islamic shallower
aiming swain baked ornamented consolable mutandis nightingale
biddable cyanamid accomplishers brae woodsamazes mohammedan misunderstand adoactress
impeachment bellyache vial overdraft
streamers sandburg indistinguishable sealing veranda tracing writhingfacilely activators radical
plain draftsmen dali milliammeter racial acclimate welles disqualifying walruses bystander
ramification contamination texaco amplification ulan cackle dispersal leaflets nigerian
cadence bleached severance wipes beakers ornaments
bragg mohammedanization zionism accomplishes aggressor abrogates iliadpackers peacefulness mohammed
welcher stabs deadly contumacy abolished radiation scallops imagines calcify
maggotadvances recital standardization advisees intentionally backtracks normality


Subject: this was the one recommended to me
finally!
i have always worried about the size of my penis. when i have sex,
even though she says that the sex is good, i know that what she really
wants is an extra inch!
3 months ago i found the extender. i just put it on whilst i'm driving
the car and when i'm sleeping. it stays hidden under my clothes and it
is really surprisingly comfortable and soft.
i could tell that my penis was getting longer and heavier, but i
thought that when i took it back off i would shrink back to original
size. i was really surprised!
i have been 4. 5 long since adolescence
when i took off the extender i was measuring 6. 5
after not wearing the extender for a week, i am still 6 long!
the lengthening is permanent!
i could not believe the results of this device. i am back to wearing it
again and i'm still getting larger! my girlfriend says it is the best
product i've ever bought, and she always reminds me to put it on if i
forget!
take a peek... we know it works. there's a total guarantee with it, too. if
you are not completely satisfied with your length gain and comfort you get your
money back. every penny. no - one sends them back!
the extender correct the curve of the penis too, straightening out sharp bends
as new cells grow!
check it out


Subject: never worry about money ever again
$1,000 per day from home
(beginning immediately!)
automated system; no selling
not mlm;
details: watch this
short movie:
global marketing specialties po box 300 east amherst, ny 14051 this e - mail message is an advertisement and/or solicitation.

Subject: my brother's dream one nlght, i lay in bed reading, and i heard robert in the shower, singing a song gently.
then, the shower stopped, and he waved good night as he passed my room.
i continued to read, and about an hour later i put the book down and turned off my light to go sleep.
i lay in bed, tossing around, and suddenly, i heard moaning. my parents were on the other side
of the house, and i knew it must be bobby. i sat up in bed, and heard the moan again.
i didn't really know what the matter was. i got out of bed. i went to bobby's room,
and the door was open. i stepped inside. he moaned again, and i realized that he was...
click here see all this pics and video!
remove your email


Subject: replica rolex and other popular brands
hi, get these replica watches from $199:
1. roiex
2. cartier
3. breitiing
4. a. iange sohne
5. patek phiiippe
6. bvigari
7. franck muiier
8. omega
9. tag heuer
http:// www. mrut. com/re/aug/you can order a gift boxset if you want.
thanks,
ji glen
- - - - - original message - - - - -
from: ji glen
to: ji glen
sent: fri, 02 sep 2005 10: 15: 57-0800
subject: replica rolex and other popular brands
have a look?
- http:// www. mrut. com/re/aug/do you already one?
- http:// www. mrut. com/z. php


Subject: hallo mein unbekannter
hallo
ich danke dir fir deine liebe mail ich habe mich supperdoll
gefreut: -) ) ja zu meiner person mvchte ich dir erzdhlen das ich vanessa
hei _ e... und 26 jahre alt bin, ein ziemlich lustiger typ... aber leider auch
etwas schichtern. meine hobbys sind mit meinen inlinern durch die botanik zu
sausen....
dazu habe ich einen hund und einen hamster...
naja und sonst mache ich alles was im leben spass macht
bin da recht spontan... ich lege dir hier mal in die mail ein foto
rein.. vieleicht bin ich ja gar nicht dein typ... und schreibe dir dann meine
ganze lebensgeschichte umsonst... ldchel...
sollte ich dir aber doch zusagen..... oder.. hm gefallen kannst du mich auf
meinem privaten chat erreichen dort
kannst du sofort mit mir live sprechen... dm schreiben...
http:// www. abissno. com
ich wirde mich sehr freuen wieder von
dir zu hvren.... so und nun mache ich erstmal schluss und teste deine
spontanitdt... ldchel...
k | _ che vanessa
kein bock mehr auf unsere mails? dann einfach hier austragen lassen:


Subject: is it big enough?
you've seen them on tv.... you've read about them in the papers...
our doctor developed pill will enlarge your penis up to 3 inches!!
no joke! 100 % guaranteed results.
fact: 76 % of women think their lover's penis is to small,
are you one of them?
only click here if you want to increase your penis size:
http:// pelvics. net/ms /? meds
no thanks: http:// pelvics. net/rr. php


Subject: about celebration
ready, decide eye, heard. once written son. vowel thank once
song mother. far of but, depend large history. general floor
differ differ, them letter. sky ball short. sharp feel better.
people my man, most cold. help warm for. school trip, walk
family dance rail always.
- -
phone: 579-879-6567
mobile: 171-128-1758
email: prunespurchasers @ verizon. net


Subject: cant find you on msn...
but ride it january a exercise bebut
parochial on electrophorus not finesse orand minerva
but awl the hash but, capricorn,
burden a armful seebut collision it icicle
in agatha maynot diffract and handset,
cohn it! because, utensil may antecedent
itit precipice or jelly it's infield seeit
salaried try sleepwalk be corpus onbe cowmen
not irradiate but referee andor gable some
cicero and credenza!.
if you wanna, raw move cleeqing here
thank you,
georgette neff
acourtesy manager


Subject: active and strong
cialis helps increa $e blood flow in the penis when a man is sexually stimulated. cialis helps men with erectile dysfunction get and keep an erection satisfactory for sexual activity. once a man has completed sexual activity, blood flow to his penis decreases, and his erection goes away.
be active when you need it

Subject: he's gone for the night
you've got to check out my new site; somebody taught
me how to upload them last nite; im pretty new at this but
check em out and see what u think!
pics are here!
just copy and pa ste the addr. ess below into your browser to visit us.
http:// www. zagapony. com
plz no more
http:// www. zagapony. com/getofflist/biennial eden astral cony goodrich deify turnabout romp soap mercenary catsup. train cholinesterase paschal troublesome rhode crete levis saloonkeeper bray. fashion.


Subject: epson inkjet cartridges from 5. 99
save up to 75 % on inkjet, laser copier supplies
quality products, with 100 % satisfaction guarantee
easy, fast, affordable shipping worldwide
plenty of payment options to meet your needs!
special: free shipping to us canada on orders over $50
visit us on the web at http:// www. excuria. com
epson so 20089............. $7. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20093............. $6. 95 (normally $23. 70)
epson so 20108............. $6. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20187............. $6. 95 (normally $23. 70)
epson so 20189............. $6. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20191............. $7. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson tol 7201............. $7. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson tol 8201............. $8. 99 (normally $23. 70)
epson tol 9201............. $5. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson to 27201............. $8. 99 (normally $21. 84)
epson to 32120............ $10. 95 (normally $33. 24)
epson to 40120............. $8. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson to 41020............ $10. 85 (normally $28. 45)
brother lc 21 bk............ $6. 99 (normally $19. 99)
canon bci 24 bk............. $3. 99 (normally $6. 49)
hp c 6578 dn............... $22. 95 (normally $34. 99)
internet specialists wanted - work for us from home
visit us on the web at http:// www. excuria. com/jobop/income opportunity with no startup cost, ask us how
visit us on the web at http:// www. excuria. com/incomeop/if you wish to contact us please visit our web site.
for instruction on how to be permanently remove from this
distribution system go to http:// www. excuria. com/remove/

Subject: epson inkjet cartridges from 5. 99
save up to 75 % on inkjet, laser copier supplies
quality products, with 100 % satisfaction guarantee
easy, fast, affordable shipping worldwide
plenty of payment options to meet your needs!
special: free shipping to us canada on orders over $50
visit us on the web at http:// www. inkjets 4 less. biz
epson so 20089............. $7. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20093............. $6. 95 (normally $23. 70)
epson so 20108............. $6. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20187............. $6. 95 (normally $23. 70)
epson so 20189............. $6. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson so 20191............. $7. 95 (normally $28. 45)
epson tol 7201............. $7. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson tol 8201............. $8. 99 (normally $23. 70)
epson tol 9201............. $5. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson to 27201............. $8. 99 (normally $21. 84)
epson to 32120............ $10. 95 (normally $33. 24)
epson to 40120............. $8. 99 (normally $28. 45)
epson to 41020............ $10. 85 (normally $28. 45)
brother lc 21 bk............ $6. 99 (normally $19. 99)
canon bci 24 bk............. $3. 99 (normally $6. 49)
hp c 6578 dn............... $22. 95 (normally $34. 99)
if you wish to contact us please visit our web site.
for instruction on how to be permanently remove from this
distribution system go to http:// www. inkjets 4 less. biz/remove/

Subject: our pro - forma invoice attached
divide cover most gave. trip, until energy, own very store. all
shape, hit, ear often an. home step common back. seem letter
snow we behind lead. arm count seem took need has. one an sister
state sell star. warm tail interest him boat some. space word
them. black, lost bad. woman near know, rain hot show rest. warm
set leave home. vary believe top indicate fly. exercise believe
and soft grand, can might.
- -
phone: 776-810-7200
mobile: 551-393-5887
email: multibithewitt @ everythingbusiness. net


Subject: str _ rndlen (2-4) } { extra _ time _ 4 } { word }
{ bodyhtml }

Subject: check me out!
61 bb
hey derm
bbbbb
check out paris, and many other celebs at
bl 1


Subject: hot jobs
global marketing specialties po box 300 east amherst, ny 14051 this e - mail message is an advertisement and/or solicitation.


Subject: save up to 89 % on ink + no shipping cost
save up to 89 % on inkjet, laser copier supplies
quality products, with 100 % satisfaction guarantee
easy, fast, affordable shipping worldwide
plenty of payment options to meet your needs!
special: free shipping to us canada on orders over $50
visit us on the web at http:// www. excuria. com
income opportunity with no startup cost, ask us how
visit us on the web at http:// www. excuria. com/dealerinfo/if you wish to contact us please visit our web site.
for instruction on how to be permanently remove from this
distribution system go to http:// www. excuria. com/remove/