http://www.trussel.com/bladerun.htm
BLADE RUNNER
Credits
Early in the 21st Century, THE TYRELL CORPORATION advanced robot evolution into the NEXUS phase - a being virtually identical to a human - known as a Replicant. The NEXUS 6 Replicants were superior in strength and agility, and at least equal in intelligence, to the genetic engineers who created them. Replicants were used Off-World as slave labor, in the hazardous exploration and colonization of other planets. After a bloody mutiny by a NEXUS 6 combat team in an Off-World colony, Replicants were declared illegal on earth - under penalty of death. Special police squads - BLADE RUNNER UNITS - had orders to shoot to kill, upon detection, any trespassing Replicant This was not called execution. It was called retirement.
LOS ANGELES
NOVEMBER, 2019
Intercom:	Next subject, Kowalski, Leon, engineer, waste disposal, file section, new employees, six days.
[knock on door]
Holden: 	Come in. Sit down.
Leon:	Care if I talk? I'm kind of nervous when I take tests.
Holden:	Uh, just please don't move.
Leon:	Oh, sorry. I already had an IQ test this year, I don't think I've ever had one of these-
Holden:	Reaction time is a factor in this, so please pay attention. Now, answer as quickly as you can.
Leon:	Sure.
Holden:	One-one-eight-seven at Unterwasser.
Leon:	That's the hotel.
Holden:	What?
Leon:	Where I live.
Holden:	Nice place?
Leon:	Yeah, sure I guess-- that part of the test?
Holden:	No, just warming you up, that's all.
Leon:	Oh. It's not fancy or anything.
Holden:	You're in a desert, walking along in the sand when all of the sudden-
Leon:	Is this the test now?
Holden:	Yes. You're in a desert walking along in the sand when all of the sudden you look down-
Leon:	What one?
Holden:	What?
Leon:	What desert?
Holden:	It doesn't make any difference what desert, it's completely hypothetical.
Leon:	But how come I'd be there?
Holden:	Maybe you're fed up, maybe you want to be by yourself, who knows? You look down and you see a tortoise, Leon, it's crawling towards you-
Leon:	Tortoise, what's that?
Holden:	Know what a turtle is?
Leon:	Of course.
Holden:	Same thing.
Leon:	I've never seen a turtle -- But I understand what you mean.
Holden:	You reach down, you flip the tortoise over on its back Leon.
Leon:	Do you make up these questions, Mr. Holden, or do they write them down for you?
Holden:	The tortoise lays on its back, its belly baking in the hot sun beating its legs trying to turn itself over but it can't, not without your help, but you're not helping.
Leon:	What do you mean I'm not helping?
Holden:	I mean, you're not helping. Why is that Leon? -- They're just questions, Leon. In answer to your query, they're written down for me. It's a test, designed to provoke an emotional response. -- Shall we continue? Describe in single words, only the good things that come in to your mind about... your mother.
Leon:	My mother?
Holden:	Yeah.
Leon:	Let me tell you about my mother...
[Leon shoots Holden]
[cut to overhead shot of city, zoom in on Deckard, reading a newspaper]
ad blimp:	A new life awaits you in the Off-World colonies. The chance to begin again in a golden land of opportunity and adventure. New...-- A new life awaits you in the Off-World colonies. The chance to begin again in a golden land of opportunity and adventure. New climate, recreational facilities.....absolutely free.
Deckard:	They don't advertise for killers in a newspaper. That was my profession. Ex-cop, ex-Blade Runner, ex-killer.
Sushi Master:	...shimasho-ka.
ad blimp:	Use your new friend as a personal body servant or a tireless field hand -- the custom tailored genetically engineered humanoid replicant designed especially for your needs. So come on America, let's put our team up there....
[Deckard walks over to sushi counter]
Sushi Master:	...kimashita, kimashita. Irasshai, irasshai. Sa dozo. Nani ni shimasho-ka.
Deckard:	Give me four.
Sushi Master:	Futatsu de jubun desuyo. [Japanese: "Two are really enough"]
Deckard:	No, four: two, two, four.
Sushi Master:	Futatsu de jubun desuyo.
Deckard:	And noodles.
Sushi Master:	Wakatte kudasai yo. [Japanese: "Please understand."]
Deckard :	Sushi, that's what my ex-wife called me. Cold fish.
Cop:	Hey, idi-wa.
Gaff:	M'sieu, aduanon kovershim angam bitte. (1)   [Fr-Hung-Ger: "Sir, you will please come with me now."]
Sushi Master:	He say you under arrest, Mr. Deckard.
Deckard:	Got the wrong guy, pal.
Gaff:	Lo fa, ne-ko shi-ma, de va-ja Blade... Blade Runner. (2)   [Hung: "Ah, don't shit me, man, you're the Blade... Blade Runner!"]
Sushi Master:	He say you Blade Runner.
Deckard:	Tell him I'm eating.
Gaff:	Captain Bryant to ka, me ni omae yo. [Japanese: "It's Captain Bryant wants to see you, y' know!"]
Deckard:	Bryant, huh?
Sushi Master:	Hai!
[Deckard and Gaff take off vertically in spinner to see Bryant.]
Spinner:	...This is yellow three. Climb and maintain 4000 ... when approaching pad six ...caution...
Deckard:	The charmer's name was Gaff. I'd seen him around. Bryant must have upped him to the Blade Runner unit. That gibberish he talked was city-speak, guttertalk, a mishmash of Japanese, Spanish, German, what have you. I didn't really need a translator. I knew the lingo, every good cop did. But I wasn't going to make it easier for him.
Spinner:	...now on glide path, on course, over the landing threshold.
[Police Station, Bryant's office]
Bryant:	Hi ya Deck.
Deckard:	Bryant.
Bryant:	You wouldn't have come if I'd just asked you to. Sit down pal. C'mon don't be an asshole Deckard. I've got four skin jobs walking the streets.
Deckard:	Skin jobs, that's what Bryants called replicants. In history books he is the kind of cop used to call black men niggers.
Bryant:	They jumped a shuttle off world -- killed the crew and passengers. They found the shuttle drifting off the coast two weeks ago so we know they're around.
Deckard:	Embarrassing.
Bryant:	No sir. Not embarrassing, 'cause no one's ever going to find out they're down here. 'Cause you're going to spot them, and you're going to air them out.
Deckard:	I don't work here anymore. Give it to Holden, he's good.
Bryant:	I did. He can breathe okay as long as nobody unplugs him. He's not good enough, not good as you. I need you, Deck. This is a bad one, the worst yet. I need the old Blade Runner, I need your magic.
Deckard:	I was quit when I come in here, Bryant, I'm twice as quit now.
Bryant:	Stop right where you are. You know the score pal. If you're not cop, you're little people.
Deckard:	No choice, huh?
Bryant:	No choice pal.
[Video room]
video:
Leon:	I already had an IQ test this year, I don't think I've ever had one of these-
Holden:	Reaction time is a factor in this, so please pay attention. Answer as quickly as you can.
Leon:	Yeah, sure.
Holden:	1-1-8-7 at Unterwasser.
Leon:	Yeah, that's the hotel.
Holden:	What?
Leon:	Where I live.
Holden:	Nice place?
Leon:	Yeah, sure I guess--
Bryant:	There was an escape from the off-world colonies two weeks ago. Six replicants, three male, three female. They slaughtered twenty-three people and jumped a shuttle. An aerial patrol spotted the ship off the coast. No crew, no sight of them. Three nights ago they tried to break into Tyrell Corporation. One of them got fried running through an electrical field. We lost the others. On the possibility they might try to infiltrate his employees, I had Holden go over and run Voight-Kampff tests on the new workers. Looks like he got himself one.
video:
Holden:	So you look down you see a tortoise. It's crawling towards you.
Leon:	Tortoise, what's that?
Holden:	Know what a turtle is?
Leon:	Of course.
Holden:	Same thing.
Leon:	I've never seen a turtle.
Deckard:	Well I don't get it. What do they risk coming back to earth for? That's unusual. Why--what do they want out of the Tyrell Corporation?
Bryant:	Well you tell me pal, that's what you're here for.
Deckard:	[funny look]. [pause] What's this?
Bryant:	Nexus 6. Roy Batty. Incept date 2016. Combat model. Optimum self-sufficiency. Probably the leader. This is Zhora. She's trained for an off-world kick-murder squad. Talk about beauty and the beast, she's both. The fourth skin job is Pris. A basic pleasure model. The standard item for military clubs in the outer colonies. They were designed to copy human beings in every way except their emotions. The designers reckoned that after a few years they might develop their own emotional responses. You know, hate, love, fear, anger, envy. So they built in a fail-safe device.
Deckard:	Which is what?
Bryant:	Four year life span.
Bryant:	Now there's a Nexus 6 over at the Tyrell Corporation. I want you to go put the machine on it.
Deckard:	And if the machine doesn't work?
[Deckard flies to the enormous Tyrell building]
Deckard :	I'd quit because I'd had a belly full of killing. But then I'd rather be a killer than a victim. And that's exactly what Bryant's threat about little people meant. So I hooked in once more, thinking that if I couldn't take it, I'd split later. I didn't have to worry about Gaff. He was brown-nosing for a promotion, so he didn't want me back anyway.
[inside the Tyrell building]
Rachael:	Do you like our owl?
Deckard:	It's artificial?
Rachael:	Of course it is.
Deckard:	Must be expensive.
Rachael:	Very. I'm Rachael.
Deckard:	Deckard.
Rachael:	It seems you feel our work is not a benefit to the public.
Deckard:	Replicants are like any other machine. They're either a benefit or a hazard. If they're a benefit, it's not my problem.
Rachael:	May I ask you a personal question?
Deckard:	Sure.
Rachael:	Have you ever retired a human by mistake?
Deckard:	No.
Rachael:	But in your position that is a risk?
Tyrell:	Is this to be an empathy test? Capillary dilation of the so-called blush response? Fluctuation of the pupil? Involuntary dilation of the iris?
Deckard:	We call it Voight-Kampff for short.
Rachael:	Mr. Deckard, Dr. Eldon Tyrell.
Tyrell:	Demonstrate it. I want to see it work.
Deckard:	Where's the subject?
Tyrell:	I want to see it work on a person. I want to see a negative before I provide you with a positive.
Deckard:	What's that going to prove?
Tyrell:	Indulge me.
Deckard:	On you?
Tyrell:	Try her.
Deckard:	It's too bright in here.
[the window changes shade, letting less light in]
Rachael:	Do you mind if I smoke?
Deckard:	It won't affect the test. All right, I'm going to ask you a series of questions. Just relax and answer them as simply as you can. -- It's your birthday. Someone gives you a calfskin wallet.
Rachael:	I wouldn't accept it. Also, I'd report the person who gave it to me to the police.
Deckard:	You've got a little boy. He shows you his butterfly collection plus the killing jar.
Rachael:	I'd take him to the doctor.
Deckard:	You're watching television. Suddenly you realize there's a wasp crawling on your arm.
Rachael:	I'd kill it.
Deckard:	You're reading a magazine. You come across a fullpage nude photo of a girl.
Rachael:	Is this testing whether I'm a replicant or a lesbian, Mr. Deckard?
Deckard:	Just answer the questions, please -- You show it to your husband. He likes it so much he hangs it on your bedroom wall.
(Deckard:	...bush outside your window...)
Rachael:	I wouldn't let him.
(Deckard :	...orange body, green legs...)
Deckard:	Why not?
Rachael:	I should be enough for him.
[audio fades out and in, time passes.]
Deckard:	One more question. You're watching a stage play. A banquet is in progress. The guests are enjoying an appetizer of raw oysters. The entree consists of boiled dog.
Tyrell:	Would you step out for a few moments, Rachael -- Thank you.
Deckard:	She's a replicant, isn't she?
Tyrell:	I'm impressed. How many questions does it usually take to spot them?
Deckard:	I don't get it Tyrell.
Tyrell:	How many questions?
Deckard:	Twenty, thirty, cross-referenced.
Tyrell:	It took more than a hundred for Rachael, didn't it?
Deckard:	She doesn't know?!
Tyrell:	She's beginning to suspect, I think.
Deckard:	Suspect? How can it not know what it is?
Tyrell:	Commerce, is our goal here at Tyrell. More human than human is our motto. Rachael is an experiment, nothing more. We began to recognize in them strange obsession. After all they are emotional inexperienced with only a few years in which to store up the experiences which you and I take for granted. If we gift them the past we create a cushion or pillow for their emotions and consequently we can control them better.
Deckard:	Memories. You're talking about memories.
[Deckard and Gaff drive to Leon's apartment in spinner, watching Leon's video.]
video:
Holden :	Reaction time is a factor in this, so please pay attention. Now, answer as quickly as you can.
Leon:	Sure.
Holden:	One-one-eight-seven at Unterwasser.
Leon:	Yeah, That's the hotel.
Holden:	What?
Leon:	Where I live.
Holden:	Nice place?
Leon:	Yeah, sure I guess--that part of the test?
Holden:	No--
[Deckard and Gaff inspect the apartment. Deckard finds a scale in the bathtub and some family photos. Gaff watches quietly, folding an origami statue of a man with an erection.]
Deckard:	I didn't know whether Leon gave Holden a legit address. But it was the only lead I had, so I checked it out -- Whatever was in the bathtub was not human. Replicants don't have scales. And family photos? Replicants didn't have families either.
[Leon meets Roy outside of phonebooth]
Roy:	Time enough -- Did you get your precious photos?
Leon:	(shakes his head no.) Someone was there.
Roy:	Man?
Leon:	(nods yes)
Roy:	Policeman?
[Roy and Leon enter Chew's laboratory]
Chew:	(mumbles to himself in Chinese -- screams when hoses are pulled by Roy)
Roy:	Fiery the angels fell. Deep thunder rolled around their shores, burning with the fires of Orc.
Chew:	(Chinese). You not come here. Illegal -- Hey. Hey. (Chinese) Cold! Those are my eyes! Freezing!
Roy:	Yes, questions.
[Leon removes Chew's jacket.]
Chew:	(Chinese, screams)
Roy:	Morphology, longevity, incept dates.
Chew:	Don't know -- I, I don't know such stuff. I just do eyes. Just eyes -- Just genetic design -- just eyes. You Nexus, huh? I design your eyes.
Roy:	Chew, if only you could see what I've seen with your eyes. Questions.
Chew:	I don't know answers.
Roy:	Who does?
Chew:	Tyrell. He -- He knows everything.
Roy:	Tyrell corporation?
Chew:	He's big boss. Big genius. He, he design your mind, your brain.
Roy:	Ah, smart.
Chew:	Cold.
Roy:	Not an easy man to see--
Chew:	Me cold.
Roy:	I guess...
Chew:	Se-, Sebastian he take-- take you there, he take you there.
Roy:	Sebastian who?
Chew:	J. -- J. F. Sebastian-- Sebas... Sebas...
Roy:	Now--where... would we find this.... J. F. Sebastian?
[In spinner, listening to Leon's video]
video:
Holden:	Let's continue, shall we? Describe in single words, only the good things that come in to your mind about... your mother.
Leon:	My mother?
Holden:	Yeah.
Leon:	I'll tell you about my mother.
[shot fired]
[In front of Deckard's apartment]]
Elevator:	Voice print identification. Your floor number please.
Deckard:	Deckard, ninety-seven.
Elevator:	Ninety-seven, thank-you, (danke)
Rachael:	I wanted to see you -- So I waited. Let me help.
Deckard:	What do I need help for?
Rachael:	I don't know why he told you what he did.
Deckard:	Talk to him.
Rachael:	He wouldn't see me.
Deckard:	You want a drink? Huh? No?
Rachael:	You think I'm a replicant, don't you?
Deckard:	Hah.
Rachael:	Look, it's me with my mother.
Deckard:	Yeah. -- Remember when you were six? You and your brother snuck into an empty building through a basement window. You were gonna play doctor. He showed you his, but when it got to be your turn you chickened and ran. Remember that? You ever tell anybody that? Your mother, Tyrell, anybody huh? You remember the spider that lived in a bush outside your window? Orange body, green legs. Watched her build a web all summer. Then one day there was a big egg in it. The egg hatched--
Rachael:	The egg hatched...
Deckard:	And?
Rachael:	And a hundred baby spiders came out. And they ate her.
Deckard:	Implants! Those aren't your memories. They're somebody else's. They're Tyrell's niece's -- Okay, bad joke. I made a bad joke. You're not a replicant. Go home, okay? No really, I'm sorry. Go home -- Want a drink? I'll get you a drink. I'll get a glass.
[Rachael runs away when Deckard turns to get a glass.]
[Deckard, on balcony.]
Deckard:	Tyrell really did a job on Rachael. Right down to a snapshot of a mother she never had, a daughter she never was. Replicants weren't supposed to have feelings. Neither were Blade Runners. What the hell was happening to me? Leon's pictures had to be as phony as Rachael's. I didn't know why a replicant would collect photos. Maybe they were like Rachael. They needed memories.
[Outside J. F. Sebastians's apartment building. Pris covers herself in trash pile.]
Pris:	Pugh... Uhhh... Ungh... Ungh...
Sebastian:	Hey! You forgot your bag.
Pris:	I'm lost.
Sebastian:	Don't worry, I won't hurt you. -- What's your name?
Pris:	Pris.
Sebastian:	Mine's J. F. Sebastian.
Pris:	Hi.
Sebastian:	Hi. Oh, where were you going? Home?
Pris:	I don't have one. We scared each other pretty good, didn't we?
Sebastian:	We sure did.
Pris:	I'm hungry J. F.
Sebastian:	I've got some stuff inside. You want to come in?
Pris:	I was hoping you'd say that.
[Pris and Sebastian enter building.]
Pris:	Do you live in this building all by yourself?
Sebastian:	Yeah, I live here pretty much alone right now. No housing shortage around here. Plenty of room for everybody.
Pris:	(cough).
Sebastian:	Watch out for the water.
Pris:	Must get lonely here J. F.
Sebastian:	Mmm... Not really. I make friends. They're toys. My friends are toys. I make them. It's a hobby. I'm a genetic designer. Do you know what that is?
Pris:	No.
Sebastian:	Yoo-hoo, home again.
Toys:	Home again, home again, jiggity jig. Good evening J. F.
Sebastian:	Good evening, fellas.
Toy 1:	Oooh!
Sebastian:	They're my friends. I made them. Where are your folks?
Pris:	I'm sort of an orphan.
Sebastian:	Oh, what about your friends?
Pris:	I have some, but I have to find them. I'll let 'em know where I am tomorrow.
Sebastian:	Oh. Can I take those things for you? They're soaked aren't they?
[Deckard's apartment, Deckard uses the Esper machine]
Deckard:	Enhance 224 to 176. Enhance, stop. Move in, stop. Pull out, track right, stop. Center in, pull back. Stop. Track 45 right. Stop. Center and stop. Enhance 34 to 36. Pan right and pull back. Stop. Enhance 34 to 46. Pull back. Wait a minute, go right, stop. Enhance 57 to 19. Track 45 left. Stop. Enhance 15 to 23. Give me a hard copy right there.
[Market]
Deckard:	Fish?
Cambod. Lady:	I think it was manufactured. Look. Finest quality. Superior workmanship. There is a maker's serial number 9906947-XB71. Interesting. Not fish. Snake scale.
Deckard:	Snake?
Cambod. Lady:	Try Abdul ben Hassan. He make this snake.
[Abdul Hassan's]
Deckard:	Abdul Hassan? I'm a police officer, I'd like to ask you a few questions. Artificial snake license XB71, that's you? This is your work, huh? Who did you sell it to?
Abdul:	My work? Not too many could afford such quality.
Deckard:	How many?
Abdul:	Very few.
Deckard:	How few? Look my friend.
Abdul:	Taffy Lewis's, down in First Sector, Chinatown.
[Taffy Lewis's]
Deckard:	Bartender? Taffy Lewis? Taffy, I'd like to ask you a few questions.
Taffy:	Blow with me.
Deckard:	You ever buy snakes from the Egyptian, Taffy?
Taffy:	All the time, pal.
Deckard:	Y'ever see this girl, huh?
Taffy:	Never seen her, buzz off.
Deckard:	Your licenses in order pal?
Taffy:	Hey Louie, the man is dry. Give him one on the house, okay? See ya.
[Deckard calls Rachael on a public videophone.]
Rachael:	Hello?
Deckard:	I've had people walk out on me before, but not when I was being so charming. I'm at a bar here now down in the Fourth Sector. Taffy Lewis's on the line. Why don't you come on down here and have a drink?
Roy:	I don't think so, Mr. Deckard. That's not my kind of place.
Deckard:	Go someplace else?
[Deckard returns to Taffy's]
Announcer:	Ladies and Gentlemen. Taffy Lewis presents Miss Salomé and the snake. Watch her take the pleasures from the serpent that once corrupted man.
[Miss Salomé's dressing room.]
Deckard:	Excuse me, Miss Salomé, can I talk to you for a minute? I'm from the American Federation of Variety Artists.
Zhora:	Oh, yeah?
Deckard:	I'm not here to make you join. No ma'am. That's not my department. Actually, uh. I'm from the, uh, Confidential Committee on Moral Abuses.
Zhora:	Committee of Moral Abuses?
Deckard:	Yes, ma'am. There's been some reports that the management has been taking liberties with the artists in this place.
Zhora:	I don't know nothing about it.
Deckard:	Have you felt yourself to be exploited in any way?
Zhora:	How do you mean, exploited?
Deckard:	Well, like to get this job. I mean, did you do, or- or were you asked to do anything lewd or unsavory or otherwise, uh, repulsive to your person, huh?
Zhora:	Ha. Are you for real?
Deckard:	Oh yeah. I'd like to check your dressing room if I may.
Zhora:	For what?
Deckard:	For, uh, for holes.
Zhora:	Holes?
Deckard:	You'd be surprised what a guy'd go through to get a glimpse of a beautiful body.
Zhora:	No, I wouldn't.
Deckard:	Little, uh, dirty holes they uh, drill in the wall so they can watch a lady undress. -- Is this a real snake?
Zhora:	Of course it's not real. Do you think I'd be working in a place like this if I could afford a real snake? -- So if somebody does try to exploit me, who do I go to about it?
Deckard:	Me.
Zhora:	You're a dedicated man. Dry me.
[Fight and chase]
Hari Krishnas:	Hari, Hari. Hari, Hari. Hari, Hari.
Street Thing:	Cross now... Don't walk...
Deckard:	Move! Get out of the way!
[Deckard fires. Kills Zhora in dramatic slow motion scene.]
Deckard:	The report would be routine retirement of a replicant which didn't make me feel any better about shooting a woman in the back. There it was again. Feeling, in myself. For her, for Rachael.
Deckard:	Deckard. B-263-54.
Street thing:	Move on...
Lady:	...a minute. Yeah what do you want?
Deckard:	Tsing tao. This enough?
Lady:	Yeah.
Gaff:	Bryant.
Bryant:	Christ, Deckard, you look almost as bad as that skin job you left on the sidewalk.
Deckard:	I'm going home.
Bryant:	You could learn from this guy, Gaff. He's a god damn one man slaughter house. That's what he is. Four more to go. Come on, Gaff, let's go.
Deckard:	Three. There's three to go.
Bryant:	There's four. That-- That skin job that you V-K'ed at the Tyrell Corporation, Rachael. Disappeared. Vanished. Didn't even know she was a replicant. Something to do with a brain implant says Tyrell. Come on Gaff. Drink some for me, pal.
[Leon stops Deckard in the street]
Deckard:	Leon.
Leon:	How old am I?
Deckard:	I don't know.
Leon:	My birthday is April 10, 2017. How long do I live?
Deckard:	Four years.
Leon:	More than you. Painful to live in fear, isn't it? Nothing is worse than having an itch you can never scratch.
Deckard:	Oh, I agree.
Leon:	Wake up! Time to die.
[Rachael shoots Leon]
[Deckard's apartment]
Deckard:	Shakes? Me too.
Rachael:	What?
Deckard:	I get 'em bad. It's part of the business.
Rachael:	I'm not in the business. -- I am the business.
[Deckard gurgles blood.]
Rachael:	What if I go north. Disappear. Would you come after me? Hunt me?
Deckard:	No. No, I wouldn't. I owe you one. But somebody would.
Rachael:	Deckard? You know those files on me The incept date, the longevity, those things. You saw them?
Deckard:	They're classified.
Rachael:	But you're a policeman.
Deckard:	I didn't look at them.
Rachael:	You know that Voight-Kampf test of yours? Did you ever take that test yourself? Deckard?
[Deckard falls asleep while Rachael plays the piano and lets down her hair.]
Deckard:	I dreamt music.
Rachael:	I didn't know if I could play. I remember lessons. I don't know if it's me or Tyrell's niece.
Deckard:	You play beautifully.
[A little rough-housin']
Deckard:	Say kiss me.
Rachael:	I can't rely on...
Deckard:	Say kiss me.
Rachael:	Kiss me.
Deckard:	I want you.
Rachael:	I want you.
Deckard:	Again.
Rachael:	I want you. Put your hands on me.
[Sebastian's apartment]
Sebastian:	Whatcha doing?
Pris:	Sorry, just peeking.
Sebastian:	Oh.
Pris:	How do I look?
Sebastian:	You look better.
Pris:	Just better?
Sebastian:	Well, you look beautiful.
Pris:	Thanks. -- How old are you?
Sebastian:	Twenty-five.
Pris:	What's your problem?
Sebastian:	Methuselah's syndrome.
Pris:	What's that?
Sebastian:	My glands. They grow old too fast.
Pris:	Is that why you're still on earth?
Sebastian:	Yeah, I couldn't pass the medical. Anyway, I kind of like it here.
Pris:	I like you just the way you are. Hi Roy.
Roy:	Ah, gosh. You've really got some nice toys here.
Pris:	This is the friend I was telling you about. This is my savior J. F. Sebastian.
Roy:	Sebastian. I like a man that stays put. You live here all by yourself, do ya?
Sebastian:	Yes. -- How 'bout some breakfast. I was just gonna make some. Excuse me.
Pris:	Well?
Roy:	Leon...
Pris:	What's going on.
Roy:	Ah... There's only two of us now.
Pris:	Then we're stupid and we'll die.
Roy:	No we won't.
[Sebastian and Roy at chess board]
Sebastian:	No, knight takes queen, see. No good.
Roy:	Why are you staring at us Sebastian?
Sebastian:	Because. You're so different. You're so perfect.
Roy:	Yes.
Sebastian:	What generation are you?
Roy:	Nexus six.
Sebastian:	Ah, I knew it. 'Cause I do genetic design work for the Tyrell Corporation. There's some of me in you. Show me something.
Roy:	Like what?
Sebastian:	Like anything.
Roy:	We're not computers Sebastian, we're physical.
Pris:	I think, Sebastian, therefore I am.
Roy:	Very good Pris, now show him why.
[Pris throws hot egg at Sebastian]
Roy:	We've got a lot in common.
Sebastian:	What do you mean?
Roy:	Similar problems.
Pris:	Accelerated decrepitude.
Sebastian:	I don't know much about biomechanics, Roy, I wish I did.
Roy:	If we don't find help soon, Pris hasn't got long to live. We can't allow that. -- Is he good?
Sebastian:	Who?
Roy:	Your opponent.
Sebastian:	Oh, Dr. Tyrell? I've only beaten him once in chess. He's a genius. He designed you.
Roy:	Maybe he could help.
Sebastian:	I'd be happy to mention it to him.
Roy:	Better if I talk to him in person.
Sebastian:	Umh.
Roy:	But I understand he's a sort of hard man to get to.
Sebastian:	Yes, very.
Roy:	Will you help us?
Sebastian:	I can't.
Pris:	We need you Sebastian. You're our best and only friend.
Roy:	(strange accent) We're so happy you found us.
Pris:	I don't think there's another human being in the whole world who would have helped us.
[Tyrell's apartment]
Tyrell:	66 thousand Prosser and Ankovich. Hmm.. Trade. Trade at--
Computer:	New entry. A Mr. J. F. Sebastian. 1-6-4-1-7.
Tyrell:	At this hour? What can I do for you Sebastian.
Sebastian:	Queen to Bishop 6. Check.
Tyrell:	Nonsense. Just a moment. Mmm. Queen to Bishop 6. Ridiculous. Queen to Bishop 6. Hmm... Knight takes Queen. -- What's on your mind Sebastian? What are you thinking about.
Roy:	(whispered) Bishop to King 7. Checkmate.
Sebastian:	Bishop to King 7. Checkmate, I think.
Tyrell:	Got a brainstorm, huh, Sebastian? Milk and cookies kept you awake, huh? Lets discuss this. You better come up, Sebastian.
Sebastian:	Mr. Tyrell. I-- I brought a friend.
Tyrell:	I'm surprised you didn't come here sooner.
Roy:	It's not an easy thing to meet your maker.
Tyrell:	And what can he do for you?
Roy:	Can the maker repair what he makes.
Tyrell:	Would you like to be modified?
Roy:	Stay here. -- I had in mind something a little more radical.
Tyrell:	What-- What seems to be the problem?
Roy:	Death.
Tyrell:	Death. Well, I'm afraid that's a little out of my jurisdiction, you--
Roy:	I want more life, fucker.
Tyrell:	The facts of life. To make an alteration in the evolvment of an organic life system is fatal. A coding sequence cannot be revised once it's been established.
Roy:	Why not?
Tyrell:	Because by the second day of incubation, any cells that have undergone reversion mutations give rise to revertant colonies like rats leaving a sinking ship. Then the ship sinks.
Roy:	What about EMS recombination.
Tyrell:	We've already tried it. Ethyl methane sulfonate as an alkylating agent a potent mutagen It created a virus so lethal the subject was dead before he left the table.
Roy:	Then a repressive protein that blocks the operating cells.
Tyrell:	Wouldn't obstruct replication, but it does give rise to an error in replication so that the newly formed DNA strand carries the mutation and you've got a virus again. But, uh, this-- all of this is academic. You were made as well as we could make you.
Roy:	But not to last.
Tyrell:	The light that burns twice as bright burns half as long. And you have burned so very very brightly, Roy. Look at you. You're the prodigal son. You're quite a prize!
Roy:	I've done questionable things.
Tyrell:	Also extraordinary things. Revel in your time.
Roy:	Nothing the god of biomechanics wouldn't let you in heaven for.
[Tyrell screams as his eyes are gouged out.]
[On the street...]
[voices...]
Bryant:	Body identified with Tyrell a twenty-five year old male caucasian named Sebastian. J. F. Sebastian. Address Bradbury apartments, ninth sector. NM46751. I want you to go down there---
Cop:	This sector's closed to ground traffic. What are you doing here?
Deckard:	I'm working. What are you doing?
Cop:	Arresting you. That's what I'm doing.
Deckard:	I'm Deckard. Blade Runner. Two sixty three-fifty four. I'm filed and monitored
Cop:	Hold on. Checking. -- Okay, checked and cleared. Have a better one.
[Deckard calls Sebastian's apartment.]
Pris:	Hello?
Deckard:	Hi, is J. F. there?
Pris:	Who is it?
Deckard:	This is Eddie. An old friend of J. F.'s.
[Pris hangs up.]
Deckard:	Ooh. That's no way to treat a friend.
[Deckard enters Sebastian's apartment.]
Toys:	Home again, home again, jiggity jig. Good evening J. F.
Toy 1:	Oooh!
[Lots o' background noise from the toys... Deckard searches... He takes off Pris's veil. Pris attacks, crushing his heard between her legs. Deckard shoots Pris... again... again. Roy arrives. Deckard fires, but misses.]
Roy:	Not very sporting to fire on an unarmed opponent. I thought you were supposed to be good. Aren't you the good man? Come on Deckard. Show me what you're made of.
[Roy breaks through wall.]
Roy:	Proud of yourself, little man? This is for Zhora.
Deckard:	Arrggh.
Roy:	This is for Pris.
Deckard:	Arrgghh.
Roy:	Come on, Deckard, I'm right here, but you've got to shoot straight.
[Deckard fires again.]
Roy:	Straight doesn't seem to be good enough. Now it's my turn. I'm gonna give you a few seconds before I come. One, Two. Three, Four. -- Pris...
Deckard:	Arrghhh.
[Chase starts... Roy begins howling.]
Roy:	(singing) I'm coming. -- Four, five. How to stay alive. -- I can see you! -- (grasping hand) Not yet. Not...
[Roy puts spike through hand and screams.]
Roy:	Deckard-- Yes...
[Roy puts head through wall.]
Roy:	You better get it up, or I'm gonna have to kill ya! Unless you're alive, you can't play, and if you don't play... Six, seven. Go to hell, go to heaven.
[Fight, Deckard hits Roy with pipe.]
Roy:	Good, that's the spirit.
Roy:	That hurt. That was irrational. Not to mention, unsportsman-like. Ha ha ha. Where are you going?
[Deckard does some amazing climbing, then jumps to next building. Roy follows, holding a white pigeon.]
Roy:	Quite an experience to live in fear, isn't it? That's what it is to be a slave.
[Deckard spits at Roy as he falls; Roy catches him with one hand.]
Roy:	I've seen things you people wouldn't believe. Attack ships on fire off the shoulder of Orion. I watched C-beams glitter in the darkness at Tannhäuser Gate. All those moments will be lost in time like tears in rain. Time to die.
[Bird flies off...]
Deckard :	I don't know why he saved my life. Maybe in those last moments he loved life more than he ever had before. Not just his life, anybody's life, my life. All he'd wanted were the same answers the rest of us want. Where did I come from? Where am I going? How long have I got? All I could do was sit there and watch him die.
Gaff:	You've done a man's job, sir. I guess you're through, huh?
Deckard:	Finished.
Gaff:	It's too bad she won't live. But then again, who does?
Deckard:	Rachael? Rachael? Rachael?
[Deckard uncovers Rachael.]
Deckard:	Do you love me?
Rachael:	I love you.
Deckard:	Do you trust me?
Rachael:	I trust you.
Deckard:	Rachael?
[Deckard picks up paper unicorn.]
Gaff's voice:	It's too bad she won't live. But then again, who does?
Deckard :	Gaff had been there, and let her live. Four years, he figured. He was wrong. Tyrell had told me Rachael was special: no termination date. I didn't know how long we had together. Who does?
THE END
[Top]
JERRY PERENCHIO
and
BUD YORKIN
present

HARRISON FORD (Deckard)

BLADE RUNNER

RUTGER HAUER (Roy Batty)
SEAN YOUNG (Rachael)
EDWARD JAMES OLMOS (Gaff)
M. EMMET WALSH (H. Bryant)
DARRYL HANNAH (Pris)
WILLIAM SANDERSON (J.F. Sebastian)
BRION JAMES (Leon Kowalski)
JOE TURKEL (Dr. Eldon Tyrell)
and
JOANNA CASSIDY (Zhora)

MORGAN PAULL (Holden)
JAMES HONG (Chew)

Supervising Editor
TERRY RAWLINGS

Music
Composed, Arranged, Performed and Produced by
VANGELIS

Associate Producer
IVOR POWELL

Production Designed by
LAWRENCE G. PAULL

Director of Photography
JORDAN CRONENWETH

Screenplay by
HAMPTON FANCHER
and
DAVID PEOPLES

Produced by
MICHAEL DEELEY

Directed by
RIDLEY SCOTT
[Top]

Notes
1.  	M'sieu, aduanon kovershim angam bitte.
(suggested by Peter Gervai:)
Most probably the original (what the actor was supposed to say) was like the Hungarian phrase "azonnal kövessen engem", which means "follow me immediately", and "bitte" is German meaning "please".
Resulting in "Monsieur (French), azonnal kövessen engem (Hungarian), bitte (German)"

Sir, you will please come with me now.

2.  	Lo-faast! Nehod[y] maar! Te vad[y] a Blade... Blade Runner!
(from Silverman's transcription:)
The meaning of Gaff's sentences in Hungarian:
lo-faast is a rude expression, originally written as lofaszt, a combined form of lo, "horse" and fasz, "prick", "dick". Together, and with the accusative suffix -t, it's a shortened form of lofaszt a seggedbe, "have a horse's dick in your ass". In this context it means that Gaff tolerates Deckard's answer as nuts and refuses to be ignored.
nehod[y] maar, originally nehogy mar, is an informal spoken formula, shortened from nehogy mar ugy legyen! meaning "wish it wouldn't be that way!", enforcing Gaff's expression about Deckard's lame "leave-me-alone-sucker" answer.
te vad[y] originally te vagy, simply means "you are", and a is "the"
So, a close translation is:

Ah, don't shit me man, you're the Blade... Blade Runner.

3.  	Captain Bryant to ka, me ni omae yo.
This sounds like slightly ungrammatical Japanese:
"Captain Bryant,   to ka (for one),   me ni (at his eye, in front of him)   omae (you, [familiar]),   yo (y' know!)"

It's Captain Bryant wants to see you, y' know.

[Top]
back to script

