							ADVENTURES

							OF

						THE STARKILLER


						(episode one)

						"The Star Wars"



							by

						George Lucas



										LUCASFILM LIMITED
	SECOND DRAFT						  52 Park Way
										San Anselmo
	January 28, 1975					California 94960



				 "...And in the time of greatest
				 despair there shall come a savior,
				 and he shall be known as: THE SON
				 OF THE SUNS."

							Journal of the Whills, 3:127



		FADE IN:

	1.SPACE

		A vast sea of stars is broken as the warm, amber surface
		of the planet, UTAPAU, emerges from a total eclipse.  Five
		small moons slowly drift into view from the far side of
		the planet.  The MAIN TITLE is followed by a ROLL-UP:

				The REPUBLIC GALACTICA is dead.  Ruthless
				trader barons, driven by greed and the
				lust for power, have replaced enlightenment
				with oppression, and "rule by the people"
				with the FIRST GALACTIC EMPIRE.

				Until the tragic Holy Rebellion of "06",
				the respected JEDI BENDU OF ASHLA were the
				most powerful warriors in the Universe.
				For a hundred thousand years, generations
				of Jedi Bendu knights learned the ways of
				the mysterious FORCE OF OTHERS, and acted
				as the guardians of peace and justice in
				the REPUBLIC.  Now these legendary warriors
				are all but extinct.  One by one they have
				been hunted down and destroyed by a fero-
				cious rival sect of mercenary warriors:
				THE BLACK KNIGHTS OF THE SITH.

				It is a period of civil wars.  The EMPIRE
				is crumbling into lawless barbarism through-
				out the million worlds of the galaxy. From
				the celestial equator to the farthest
				reaches of the GREAT RIFT, seventy small
				solar systems have united in a common war
				against the tyranny of the Empire.  Under
				the command of a mighty Jedi warrior known
				as THE STARKILLER, the REBEL ALLIANCE has
				won a crushing victory over the deadly
				Imperial Star Fleet.  The Empire knows that
				one more such defeat will bring a thousand
				more solar systems into the rebellion, and
				Imperial control of the Outlands could be
				lost forever...

		A tiny silver space craft races from behind one of the
		lifeless Utapau moons.  The small rebel spacefighter is
		being chased by four giant Imperial stardestroyers. Hun-
		dreds of deadly laser bolts streak from the Imperial
		warships as they dive on the smaller craft.

		Every few moments, the little rebel ship returns the fire,
		until one of the Imperial battlewagons explodes, causing
		it to fall out of formation.  The three remaining star-
		destroyers continue the pursuit.

	2.INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - LASER GUN TURRET

		The two elaborate laser gun turrets belch a smoky exhaust
		as the gun crews, wearing heat-protective suits, goggles
		and breath masks, cheer and congratulate each other on the
		direct hit.  The gunnery CHIEF finishes speaking into his
		helmet "com-link", and yells to the crew.

							CHIEF
					I don't know what you boys are
					so cheery about; there are still
					three more out there.

		The crews snap-to, and turn back to their giant guns. Sev-
		eral stubby, three-legged ROBOTS scurry to and fro, bring-
		ing equipment, and repairing damage to sections of the
		turrets.

	3.INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - MAIN PASSAGEWAY

		The chaos of battle echoes through the narrow, main passage-
		way of the starfighter.  An explosion rocks the ship, and
		two construction robots, ARTOO DETOO (R2-D2) and SEE THREEPIO
		(C-3PO) struggle to make their way through the shaking,
		bouncing passageway.  Both robots are old and battered.
		Artoo is a short (36 inches), claw-armed, tri-ped.  His face
		is a mass of computer lights, surrounding a radar eye.
		Threepio, on the other hand, is a tall, slender robot of
		human proportions.  He has a gleaming bronze-like metallic
		surface of an "Art Deco" design.

							THREEPIO
					Artoo, my friend, this is madness!
					If this keeps up, we're going to
					be destroyed.  I'm afraid I'm still
					not accustomed to space travel...
					What are we to do?

		The little dwarf robot makes a series of electronic sounds
		that only a robot could understand.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Relax?!?...What do you mean we're
					in no immediate danger??!  You're
					faulty, this is madness!

		Artoo gives his tall companion a sheepish computer blink
		and starts off down the hallway. .

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Artoo Detoo, wait!  Wait a
					minute.

		Threepio climbs through a hatch and starts after Artoo.

	4.EXT. SPACE BATTLE

		One of the giant Imperial Stardestroyers breaks formation
		and surges ahead of the others, closing on the tiny rebel
		space craft.  The main battery of laser cannons on the
		huge Imperial warship directs an overwhelming concentra-
		tion or laser fire at the main solar fin on the rebel ship.
		Finally it disintegrates, creating a spectacular heavenly
		display.

	5.INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - POWER SECTION

		A sudden pressure change sucks equipment and debris through
		the power section of the spacefighter.  Alarms are sound-
		ing everywhere.  The spaceship shudders under the impact
		of the Imperial barrage.  Artoo and Threepio are blown,
		slipping and sliding across the hallway floor into a stack
		of freight canisters.  The lanky Threepio becomes lodged
		under a computer console.

							THREEPIO
					I'm dead!...I told you this
					would happen.  Artoo, I can't
					move.

		Little Artoo waddles over to his trapped companion.  He
		clears away several mangled canisters and climbs under the
		sparking and smoking computer.  He is chattering away in
		an elaborate combination of whistles, beeps and clicks.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Oh my, I think something is
					melting.  Artoo Detoo, this is
					all your fault...I should have
					known better than to listen to
					a half-pint thermo-astronic
					capulary dehousing - assister.
					You're truly faulty.

		Artoo counters with a rather angry rebuttal as he struggles
		to pull the larger robot free from the small leg space under
		the computer console.  Two MEN hurriedly enter the power
		station and begin checking the damage.  The robots can only
		see the humans' legs as they pass to and fro in front of
		the desk-like console; but they recognize the voice of their
		captain: DEAK STARKILLER.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Shhh, it's the captain...

		The captain's FIRST OFFICER pops his head under the console
		and sees Artoo straining to free Threepio.  The little
		robot stops.

							OFFICER
					Well, Hello!  Are you boys all
					right?

							THREEPIO
					Yes sir, I'll be out in a minute.
					No damage that I can tell. Sorry
					to be of trouble, sir...

							OFFICER
					As you were.

		Artoo goes back to his pulling and pushing as the officer
		again becomes a pair of legs, and is joined by the sturdier
		legs of Captain Starkiller.

							OFFICER (CONT'D)
					There's a C-3 unit jammed under
					the console, but no damage, sir.

		Artoo uses one of his claw arms to cut away a small metal
		beam bent around Threepio's shoulder.

							DEAK
					The solar activators are burned
					out.  The shields are down.
					They'll be boarding in no time.
					There is a Sith knight among
					them.  I can feel his para-force.
					Hurry, secure your assault posi-
					tions.  The BOGAN force is strong
					with the enemy.

							OFFICER
					Yes sir, the men are ready.

		The officer bows low and hurries out of the smoldering cham-
		ber.  Artoo stops his work, and the robots quietly watch
		Deak's legs as he paces the room.  He stands for a few mo-
		ments in meditation.  The two mechanical men suddenly feel
		as if they are intruding, and every little creak and noise
		becomes an embarrassment.  A VOICE from another part of the
		ship yells out to the captain, and he rushes out of the room.
		Threepio breathes a sigh of relief.

							  THREEPIO
					I think there will be no es-
					cape for the captain this time...

	6.EXT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER

		The smoldering silver rebel craft is quickly surrounded by
		the three giant Imperial warships.  One of the huge star-
		destroyers moves into orbit just above the helpless rebel
		spacefighter.

	7.INT. IMPERIAL STAR DESTROYER - COCKPIT

		An awesome array of lighted panels and computer monitors are
		reflected in the polished black helmets of six Imperial
		master-pilots.  A fifth-ranked General of the Fleet sits in
		a rotating chair suspended from the cabin ceiling, watching
		the chief pilot maneuver the huge warship above the tiny
		rebel spacefighter.

							CHIEF PILOT
					That's as close as I dare take
					her.

							CAPTAIN
						(into intercom)
					We are in position...stand by.
					Remember, Lord Vader wants as
					many of them taken alive as is
					possible.  There will be no
					slaughter.

	8.EXT. IMPERIAL STAR DESTROYER - UNDERBELLY

		The huge gray underbelly of the Imperial warship hovers less
		than twenty feet above the rebel spacefighter.

		A small hatch near one of the complex antenna groupings
		silently slides open.  With fascist precision, ten storm-
		troopers wearing ominous armored spacesuits drop onto the
		top of the disabled rebel craft. A burly sergeant aims
		his powerful laser pistol at the silver hull.

	9.INT. REBEL STAR FIGHTER - HALLWAY

		A tremendous blast opens up a hole six feet wide in the
		side of the main passageway, sucking equipment and debris
		into the vacuum of space.  Three fearsome stormtroopers
		armed with chrome multi-laser rifles make their way through
		the smoking debris into the padded hallway.  The SERGEANT
		and four more armored troopers quickly follow.

							SERGEANT
					Use your blades!  There's too
					much risk of blaster ricochet
					in these cramped quarters.

		The troops sling the rifles over their shoulders and take
		a small baton from their belts, which instantly ignites
		into a long glowing laser sword.

		At the far end of the passageway, a door swings wide reveal-
		ing a rebel warrior wearing a breath mask and dressed in
		the distinctive uniform of an AQUILLIAN RANGER.  A long,
		deadly laser sword glows in his right hand, while several
		chrome ping-pong sized balls magically appear in his left.
		Tiny antenna project from the chrome balls, and before the
		stormtroopers can raise their weapons, the balls fly out
		of the ranger's hand.  One of the balls stops in the middle
		of the troops and explodes.  Three other balls shoot through
		the hole ripped in the side of the ship.

	10.  EXT. IMPERIAL STARDESTROYER - UNDERBELLY

		Six armored stormtroopers are assembled on the sleek silver
		hull of the rebel spacefighter.  The three chrome balls fly
		out of the rebel craft just as several more troops drop from
		the hatch of the Imperial stardestroyer.  One or the seeker-
		bombs explodes among the assembled troops, flinging most of
		them into the vastness of space.  The two remaining bombs
		rocket toward the open hatch of the Imperial warship.  One
		of the surviving stormtroopers, clinging to the rebel craft,
		yells into his helmet intercom as he aims a laser pistol at
		the tiny chrome projectiles.

							TROOPER
					Seekers!  Seekers!  Close the
					hatches!!

		A blast from the laser pistol hits one of the balls, and
		it explodes harmlessly outside the stardestroyer.  The
		second seeker bomb races into the stardestroyer, just as
		the hatch slides closed.  A muffled explosion is heard in-
		side the huge spacecraft.

	11.  INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - HALLWAY

		The Aquillian ranger charges what's left of the storm-
		troopers.  He swings his glowing laser sword high over his
		head; but before he can bring the deadly blade down on a
		victim, four more troops enter the ship and assail the
		ranger.  He puts up a good fight, but soon falls under the
		superior odds.  A half dozen more armored stormtroopers
		enter the damaged ship and cautiously make their way down
		the narrow hallway.

	12.  INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - COCKPIT

		Smoke fills the crowded cockpit of the rebel starship. The
		pilot struggles to remove a wounded comrade as an exhausted
		Aquillian RANGER enters and bows before Deak Starkiller.
		The young captain's face is covered by a small, ornate face
		mask, but he appears to be about twenty-five years old. He
		is wearing the loose-fitting robes of a Jedi knight.

							RANGER
					The Bogan force is too strong
					upon us.  Our spirit is broken.

							DEAK
					You must rally the men, fight
					off your despair.  The force of
					others is still with us...

							RANGER
					Clieg is dead.  They're blasting
					the lifepods before we can clear
					the ship.  We're trapped...

							DEAK
					Then we must make this treachery
					costly for them.  Return to your
					station.

		The ranger bows low before the Jedi starcaptain, and rushes
		out of the cockpit.  The pilot has returned to his seat in
		front of the ship's main control board.

							DEAK (CONT'D)
					What's the power now?

							PILOT (TYREE)
					It's up to five point nine; but
					we'll need a lot more to ignite
					the engines...There just isn't
					enough time...

							DEAK
					Keep at it.I'm going aft.

							PILOT (TYREE)
					But what about your father. He
					must have the KIBER Crystal if
					Ogana Major is to survive.  He
					won't be able to hold out against
					the Imperial siege much longer.
					The risk was too great.  We'll
					never be able to make contact
					with Luke now.  We've lost every-
					thing.  We should never...

							DEAK
					You're feeling the Bogan's despair.
					Be strong, Tyree, drive it from
					your thoughts.  Luke is father's
					only hope...maybe there is still
					a slim chance we might salvage
					things.

		He moves to the computer bank, and speaks into the intercom.

							DEAK (CONT'D)
					All R-2 units stand by for new
					prime directive programming...

		He turns back to the pilot for a moment.

							DEAK (CONT'D)
					What's the R-2 scramble code?

							Pilot (TYREE)
					"Tan-takk RS-411".  Do you think
					one of them might get through?

							DEAK
					I'm afraid the chances of an R-2
					unit finding Luke down there are
					much better than Luke's chances
					of getting back to father...R-2
					units compute as follows: Scramble
					code, tan-takk RS-411.  Prime
					directive - contact code "Angel
					blue".  Seek OWEN LARS at or near
					position: 321-DC-28.  Relay the
					following transcription:

	13.  INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - MAIN HALLWAY

		Little Artoo stands ridged in the middle of the smoke-filled
		passageway.  Threepio runs awkwardly toward the tiny robot
		from a large hatchway at one end of the corridor.  Artoo's
		computer face blinks wildly.

							THREEPIO
					We're cut off.  They're coming
					from that direction.  I heard
					them.  Come on, we'll have to go
					back the way we came.

		Artoo lets out a long musical whistle, but doesn't move.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Wait!?? They'll be here in mo-
					ments!  I have no intention of
					getting sent to the spice mines
					of KESSAL, or smashed into...
					what?!  A new prime directive!??!
					Oh no!  Not at a time like this!
					How much longer?

		The muted sounds of grinding and crushing get louder until
		a dozen Imperial stormtroopers, wearing spooky-looking armor,
		enter the passageway.  They arrange themselves geometrically,
		their movements synchronized, as they move stealthily through
		the unusually wide corridor.  Threepio grabs his little part-
		ner and struggles to drag him into the shadows of an emer-
		gency ventilator system.  Hard and weary, the troops advance
		-- their glowing laser swords held at ready.  Suddenly,
		directly in back of the stormtroopers, about ten feet away,
		the imposing young Jedi, Deak Starkiller, steps from behind
		the open hatch.

		His chrome laser pistol still rests in its holster; but his
		laser sword sparks to life with a sharp hum.  One of the
		troopers senses his presence and turns freezing momentarily.
		The rest of the troops turn a second later, almost as a re-
		flex action.  A slow grim smile creeps across Deak's face,
		as the troops realize they are outmatched.

							TROOPER
					He's a Jedi.  Use your blasters!

		Six troopers who are carrying their chrome laser rifles at
		the ready start to step forward and raise their weapons.
		Deak is quicker.  In one amazing movement, he spins around,
		replacing his laser sword to his belt, and draws his deadly
		laser pistol, blasting out four shots that rip through the
		soldiers.  In a few moments, the entire passageway blazes
		with laser fire.  Laser bolts ricochet in wild random pat-
		terns, creating small explosions and finally a small hole in
		the wall, which sucks debris and stormtroopers into space,
		until finally it is plugged by a large supply canister.

		Artoo and Threepio are plummeted by loose equipment and de-
		bris.  Threepio attempts to cover his head.  Artoo pulls a
		grate off the vent system and starts to enter the dark shaft.
		Threepio clings to a side rail for dear life as debris and
		laser bolts fly past him.  Artoo beeps to his terrified com-
		panion.

							THREEPIO
					No more adventures!  I'm not
					going in there.  No!  Never!

		Artoo disappears down the ominous shaft.  He leaves his friend
		with a few parting whistles.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Don't call me a mindless philosopher,
					you overweight glob of grease!  I
					simply think you are going the wrong
					way.

		Threepio peers into the gloom of the vent shaft.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Hello?!?  Artoo?...

	14.  INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - COCKPIT CORRIDOR

		Stormtroopers scatter and run down an adjoining passageway;
		others duck behind storage lockers.

		Multiple laser fire rips through several stormtroopers who
		scream and stagger from the smoke, holding shattered arms
		and faces.  Deak and two Aquillian rangers back into a
		sealed corridor at the far end of the passageway.  Deak's
		gun jams, and the two rangers are cut down behind him. The
		young Jedi ignites his glowing red laser sword and begins
		swinging.  Stormtroopers are cut down right and left, un-
		til they flee the corridor in panic, firing wildly as they
		stumble over canisters to escape.

		Suddenly several of the panic-stricken troopers who had fled
		down a sub-hallway are back into the cockpit area, more
		afraid of what's down the sub-hallway than the deadly Jedi's
		blade.  Troopers still fleeing the area crash into those re-
		turning.

							TROOPER
					The Sith Knight...Lord Vader is
					coming.  Go back.  Go back!

		A new courage, or greater fear, seizes the troops and they
		turn on Deak again and renew the attack.  The troops scram-
		ble away from the sub-hallway entrance, as something un-
		speakably evil and terrifying approaches the cabin.

	15.  INT. REBEL STARFIGHTER - SUB-HALLWAY

		The tall, gleaming Threepio rushes through several low, nar-
		row corridors, yelling at Artoo, who races along as fast as
		his stubby mechanical feet will carry him.

							THREEPIO
					Wait!  Wait a minute.  I'm coming.
					...Would you mind telling me where
					you are off to?

		Artoo throws a short beep over his shoulder.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)

					Leaving?!  Leaving where?  Don't
					be ridiculous, that's desertion!
					I order you to stop.  Did you
					hear me?  Stop!

		Artoo continues on, countering with a frenzy of electronic
		whistles and twangs.


							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					What new prime directive?  Why
					didn't I receive it?
					What's so important that I'm
					not to be trusted?  I don't
					believe you.  I think you're
					rattled.

		Artoo stops before the small hatch of an emergency lifepod.
		He snaps the seal on the main latch and a red warning light
		begins to flash.  The stubby, dwarf-robot works his way
		into the cramped four-man pod.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Hey!  What are you doing?  You
					can't use that!...It's restricted.
					You're not permitted in there;
					you'll be de-activated for sure.
					The situation is not that des-
					perate!  Now come out of there
					before someone sees you.

		A new explosion, this time very close, sends dust and debris
		through the narrow sub-hallway.  Flames lick at the two ro-
		bots.  After a flurry of electronic swearing from Artoo, the
		lanky bronze Threepio jumps into the lifepod.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					I think I'm going to regret this;
					but my prime directive IS preser-
					vation.

		The safety door snaps shut, and with the thunder of explod-
		ing latches, the tiny lifepod ejects from the disabled star-
		fighter.

	16.  INT. IMPERIAL STARDESTROYER - COCKPIT

		On the main viewscreen, the lifepod carrying the two terri-
		fied robots speeds away from the stricken rebel spacecraft.

							CHIEF PILOT
					There goes another one.  Look.

							CAPTAIN
					Hold your fire.  No lifeforms.
					It must have short-circuited.

		The captain gets a message on his headset.

							CAPTAIN (CONT'D)
					Yes...Yes...He's on his way
					down now...No. Good, excellent.
					I'll relay it.
						(he turns to
						the pilots)
					The ship is ours!

		The pilots cheer and an excited murmur rushes throughout
		the ship.

	17.  EXT. SKY OVER UTAPAU - LIFEPOD

		The reddish-yellow mass of Utapau seems to engulf the tiny
		lifepod containing the two robots.  The grouping of star-
		destroyers grows smaller as the pod descends toward the
		planet.

							THREEPIO
					That's funny, the damage
					doesn't look as bad from out
					here.  Are you sure this thing
					is safe?

	18.  INT. REBEL SPACEFIGHTER - COCKPIT CORRIDOR

		Deak Starkiller cuts down several troops who make a fren-
		zied, suicidal charge with laser swords.

							TROOPS
					The Bogan!  The Bogan!

		They are no match for the incredibly agile young Jedi.  For
		an eerie moment, all is deathly quiet as a huge darker figure
		appears in the sub-hallway.  The remaining stormtroopers bow
		low toward the doorway.  An awesome, seven-foot BLACK KNIGHT
		OF THE SITH makes his way into the blinding light of the cock-
		pit area.  This is LORD DARTH VADER, right hand to the MASTER
		OF THE SITH.  His sinister face is partially obscured by his
		flowing black robes and grotesque breath mask, which are in
		sharp contrast to the fascist white armored suits of the
		Imperial stormtroopers.  The troops instinctively back away
		from the imposing warrior.

		Deak Starkiller stands firm; a new look of resolve sweeps
		across his tired face.  The smoky room is deathly quiet, ex-
		cept for the occasional snapping and popping of burning
		electrical circuits in the cockpit's sophisticated control
		panel.

		As the Black Knight enters the corridor, the few surviving
		troopers scramble into the sub-hallway.  Lord Vader speaks
		in an oddly filtered voice through his complex breathing
		mask.

							VADER
					At last we meet!

							DEAK
					With so much commotion, I
					expected your master, not
					merely a servant.

		Vader is angered by this remark.  Taking a deep breath, he
		raises his arms and every object that isn't bolted down is
		picked up by an invisible force and hurled at the young
		Jedi.  When the objects reach about two feet of Deak, they
		are deflected by an invisible shield which surrounds him.

							DEAK (CONT'D)
					The Bogan is strong with you;
					but not nearly strong enough.
					I'm afraid youÕll have to use
					your weapon, if you're able!

							VADER
					I am Lord Darth Vader, first
					Knight of the Sith, and right
					hand to His Eminence Prince
					Espaa Valorum, the Master of
					the Bogan.  You will not mock
					me, or my Master; for the Ashla
					is weak, and the FORCE OF OTHERS
					cannot save you now...

		The fearsome dark knight ignites his laser sword and takes
		a defensive stance.  The two galactic warriors stand per-
		fectly still for a few moments, sizing each other up and
		waiting for the right moment.  Deak seems to be under in-
		creasing pressure and strain, as if an invisible weight
		were being placed upon him.  He shakes his head and blink-
		ing, tries to clear his eyes.

							VADER (CONT'D)
					Your powers are weak...

		Deak makes a sudden lunge at the huge warrior but is checked
		by a lightning movement of the SITH.  A second masterful
		slash-stroke by Deak is again blocked by his evil opponent.

		They stand motionless for a few moments, with laser swords
		locked in mid-air, creating a low buzzing sound.  Another
		of the Jedi's blows is blocked, then countered.  Deak stum-
		bles back against a wall.  Slowly Deak is forced to his
		knees as all his energy is drained from his being. Finally,
		he collapses in a heap.  The sinister knight lets out a
		horrible, shrieking laugh, as stormtroopers rush in with
		restraining poles, followed by a braided and flashy Imperial
		commander.  Deak's arms and legs are pinned to the wall.
		He struggles with his bonds.

							COMMANDER
					So, we got him.  Your para-
					force is strong indeed.  The
					Emperor will be pleased. Why,
					he's just a boy!

		An Imperial officer takes a gold medallion from around the
		young Jedi's neck.

							OFFICER
					The Starkiller!

		A murmur of astonishment races throughout the troops.

							COMMANDER
					Impossible!  He would have to
					be over three hundred years old.
					How could this Jedi possibly be
					the Starkiller?

		The great Black Knight studies the golden crest, and then
		stares into the eyes of the fuming Jedi.  Vader has a visi-
		ble dislike of the commander.

							VADER
					This is another of his sons.

							COMMANDER
					Your master said he'd killed them
					all...And why is he wearing his
					father's crest?

							VADER
					His father must be dead.  The
					Starkiller would never give this
					up if he were alive...It possesses
					great power.  This boy must be
					the last...

							COMMANDER
					"The son of the suns!" The
					last of the Starkiller line,
					whom the seer's have said
					would bring down the Empire.

							VADER
					It appears we have altered
					destiny.

							COMMANDER
						(to an aid)
					Send word to the Emperor.
					We've captured their "Savior".
					The rebellion is broken. The
					Starkiller is dead.  Let the
					attack of Ogana Major begin...

		The Black Knight takes a restraining pole from one of the
		guards and brutally jabs the young Jedi in the chest.  Deak
		squirms in pain but does not cry out.  He is struck again.
		An officer approaches the commander.

							OFFICER
					Why would he chance running
					the blockade to come out here
					in the middle of nowhere.
					There is little on this planet...

							COMMANDER
					An interesting question. Send
					a platoon of "Tuskens" to the
					planet surface and have them
					report anything unusual. Maybe
					he has friends we should know
					about...
						(turning pointedly
						to Vader)
					or perhaps another brother...

		Vader gives the commander an angry stare and suddenly it
		appears as if the commander can't catch his breath.  The
		commander turns and rushes out of the cabin in great dis-
		tress.  Vader punches Deak one last time.

							VADER
					You will come to know such suf-
					fering as only the Master of the
					Bogan Force can provide.  From
					you he will learn many secrets...

		Vader throws Deak's head back painfully hard against the
		wall.

							VADER (CONT'D)
						(to the guards)
					Bind him, and take him to my
					ship.
						(to Deak)
					There is no one to save you now.

		His frightening laugh rings throughout the starship.

	19.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - EDGE OF THE DUNE SEA

		JUNDLAND, or "No Man's Land" where the rugged desert mesas
		meet the foreboding dune sea.  The two helpless astro-robots
		kick up clouds of dust as they leave the lifepod, and clum-
		sily work their way across the desert coastline.  The stubby
		Artoo struggles desperately to keep up with the long-legged
		Threepio.  Suddenly, Artoo makes a sharp right turn, and
		starts off in the direction of the rocky desert mesas.
		Threepio stops and yells at him.

							THREEPIO
					Where do you think you're going?!?

		A stream of electronic noises pour forth from the small ro-
		bot.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					...to find Owen Lars?!?  What's
					that?!?  Just because the boss
					was looking for his brother
					doesn't mean WE have to look for
					him!  That WAS the prime direc-
					tive, but not anymore...Besides,
					why go that way?  It's so rocky.
					Why not go this way?  It would
					be much easier.  How do you KNOW
					Owen Lars is that way?

		Artoo continues his electronic babbling.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Don't get technical with me. I
					think you're going the wrong way.
					I've had just about enough of you!
					You pragmatic, nearsighted scrap
					pile.
					I don't believe this "Angel Blue"
					even exits, but you just go that
					way.  You'll be malfunctioning
					within a day.

		He picks up the tiny robot and tosses him several feet into
		a large sand dune.  Threepio starts off in the direction
		of the dune sea.  Artoo struggles to his three, stubby feet
		and shakes a metallic claw arm at his disappearing ex-partner.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
						(over his shoulder)
					...And don't let me catch you
					following me begging for help --
					because you won t get it!

		Artoo counters with a few short whistles.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Don't call ME a traitor.  My
					loyalty is impeccable!...You
					emotion-brained intellectual...

		Artoo's reply is a rather rude sound.  He turns and trudges
		off in the opposite direction.

	20.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - DUNE SEA

		Threepio, hot and tired, struggles up over the ridge of a
		dune, only to find more dunes, which seem to go on for end-
		less miles.  He looks back in the direction of the now dis-
		tant rock mesas.

							THREEPIO
					You little malfunctioning twerp.
					This is all your fault.  You
					tricked me into going this way,
					but you'll do no better.

		He sits in a huff of anger and frustration, knocking the
		sand from his joints.  His plight seems hopeless, when a
		glint of reflected light in the distance reveals an object
		speeding toward him.  The bronze android waves frantically
		and yells at the approaching transport.

	21.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - ROCK MESA

		The little Artoo stumbles over several boulders as he strug-
		gles to reach the crest of a rocky mesa.

		He reaches the top and scans the foreboding desert valley
		below.  Far in the distance, shining in the twin suns like
		an inviting oasis, stands the settlement of ANCHORHEAD.
		The mechanical runt carries on an electronic conversation
		with himself as he searches the rugged ground for something.
		He picks up a large stone in his powerful claw hand, then
		discards it.  He finds another stone that he is apparently
		satisfied with, carries it to the edge of the butte, and
		tosses it over.  The stone slams down the steep side of the
		mesa, kicking up dust and creating a small avalanche.  He
		makes some quick calculations, then starts off down the
		treacherous slope.

	22.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - ROCK CANYON

		The gargantuan rock formations are shrouded in a strange
		mist, and the ominous sounds of unearthly creatures fill
		the air.  Artoo moves cautiously through the creepy rock
		canyon, inadvertently making a loud clicking noise as he
		goes.  He hears a distant, hard metallic sound and stops
		for a moment.  He hears nothing.  He sees nothing moving.
		Convinced he is alone, he continues on his way.

		In the distance, a pebble tumbles down the steep canyon wall
		and a small dark figure darts into the shadows.  A little
		further up the canyon, a slight flicker of light reveals a
		pair of eyes in the dark recesses, only a few feet from the
		narrow path.

		The unsuspecting robot waddles along the rugged trail un-
		til suddenly, out of nowhere, a powerful magnetic ray shoots
		out of the rocks and engulfs him in an eerie glow.  He
		manages one short electronic squeak before he topples over
		onto his back.  His bright computer lights flicker off,
		then on, then off again.  Out of the rocks scurry three
		MEN, no taller than Artoo.  They holster strange and com-
		plex weapons as they cautiously approach the robot.  They
		wear grubby cloaks, and their faces are shrouded so that
		only their yellow eyes can be seen.  They hiss and make
		odd guttural sounds as they heave the heavy robot to their
		shoulders, and carry him off down the trail.  The vile little
		creatures grunt and groan as they struggle with their weighty
		prize.  They smell horribly, attracting small insects to
		the dark areas where their mouths and nostrils should be.

	23.  EXT. ROCK CANYON - SANDCRAWLER

		Eight dwarfs, or JAWAS, as they're sometimes called, carry
		Artoo out of the canyon to a huge sandcrawler -- a tank-
		like vehicle the size of a two-story house.

		They place the robot in a small bin on one side of the
		crawler, and a mechanical arm promptly lifts the bin, dump-
		ing the unconscious Artoo into the back of the giant trac-
		tor.  The filthy little Jawas scurry like rats up small
		ladders and enter the main cabin of the behemoth transport.
		Several windows light up in the cockpit area toward the
		front of the crawler followed by the loud scream of power-
		ful engines.  The enormous sandcrawler turns and lumbers
		off toward the magnificent twin suns, now slowly setting
		over a distant mountain range.

	24.  INT. SANDCRAWLER - HOLD AREA

		It is dim and dank inside the hold area of the sandcrawler.
		Artoo lies on a pile of metal scrap, lifepods, rocket parts,
		and the limbs and dismembered parts of robots.  Artoo's
		computer lights slowly begin to glow, then they blink on
		full power.  He makes a few electronic sounds to himself as
		he tries to figure out what happened, and where he is.  He
		stumbles around on the scrap heap until he thinks to turn
		on the small floodlight on his forehead.

		The narrow beam swings across the rubble and stops on the
		half-buried claw arm of another robot.  Artoo moves over
		to the buried robot and calls to it, but gets no response.
		He pulls on the arm but it won't budge.  Finally he gives
		it a good tug and it breaks loose, sending him head over
		heels.  He sits dazed, holding the severed forearm of a
		power robot, then lets out a terrifying electronic shriek.
		The little robot scans the rest of the huge chamber with
		his headlights and sees a series of grotesquely twisted and
		maimed astro robots.  The narrow beam comes to rest on a
		battered, but otherwise whole "common-labor" robot.  The
		"laborer" makes a move to cover his giant electronic eye,
		which is extended on a long tube from his box-like body.
		Little Artoo jumps back in fright.

							LABORER
					Shut off that light!

		Artoo is still shaken, but manages a short apology and then
		shuts off his light.  The laborer robot is barely visible.

							LABORER (CONT'D)
					Is there no peace!?  This is
					MY chamber, go find yourself
					another.  Go on...go on!  Get
					out!

		Artoo stumbles off toward what appears to be a door at the
		end of the chamber.

		He enters a large room with a very low ceiling (about four
		feet high).  In the middle of the scrap heap sit a dozen
		or so robots of various shapes and sizes.  Some are engaged
		in electronic conversation, while others simply mill about.
		In the middle of the group sits a strange, little robot with
		a large worklight for a head, which illuminates the odd
		assemblage of mechanical slaves.  A blue "astroconstruction"
		robot -- somewhat similar to Artoo, only a bit fatter -
		approaches the newcomer and beeps an electronic greeting.
		The two stubby robots exchange electronic analysis of the
		situation as they waddle toward the group.  A voice of rec-
		ognition calls out from the gloom.

							THREEPIO
					Artoo!  Artoo Detoo!  It's you!

		A battered and slightly worse-for-wear Threepio scrambles
		up to Artoo on his hands and knees (remember the four foot
		ceiling) and embraces him.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					...they've caught you, too. I'm
					afraid we're doomed!  We're
					doomed!

		The blue robot continues on back to the group as the two
		old companions huddle in a hollow of scrap metal.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					We've landed on one of the
					OUTLAND DARK PLANETS!  There is
					no hope for us now.  These Jawa's
					aren't traders, they're metalmen.
					They'll melt us down.  I'm not
					useful like you, they'll scrap me
					for sure.

		Artoo makes a short electronic reply.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					You're right.  I should not have
					ignored your prime directive.
					But it's a little late now...
					Wait, we're stopping!

	25.  EXT. WASTELAND - NIGHT

		The monstrous sandcrawler pulls up to a large outcropping
		of rocks in the trail and grinds to a rumbling stop.

		Several Jawa's scramble out of the huge vehicle to inspect
		the boulders blocking the trail.  An argument erupts between
		one Jawa, in a red habit, and the other hooded dwarfs.  He
		yells something at the others, then walks off to the side
		of the trail.  The rest of the little creatures climb back
		into the giant tank.  The crawler starts with a low hummmmm,
		slowly moving forward until a loud scraping noise screams
		from beneath the chassis.  The red-cloaked dwarf climbs on-
		to a nearby rock and yells at the others to stop.  They ig-
		nore him.

	26.  INT. SANDCRAWLER - HOLD AREA

		The scraping sound is haunting as well as deafening.  The
		entire chamber trembles, creating quite a commotion among
		the mechanical men.  At the far end of the long chamber, a
		bright light suddenly appears, followed by a cacophony of
		electronic shouts and yells.  The "common labor" robot runs
		past the confused Artoo and Threepio.

							LABORER
					We're free!  We're free!

		Amidst the confusion of the fleeing robots, Artoo and Threepio
		carefully make their way toward a break in the side of the
		crawler.  Several Jawas appear at the opening with pistols,
		but before they can fire, they are knocked over and trampled
		by the fleeing mechanical men.

	27.  EXT. WASTELAND - NIGHT

		The sound of yelling Jawas and screaming robots fades in
		the distance as Artoo and Threepio scramble up a narrow ra-
		vine away from the sandcrawler.  They duck into a tiny crev-
		ice in the rock to avoid several fleeing robots, followed
		by a dozen armed Jawas.  After a few moments they peer out,
		and seeing that the way is clear, rush off down the winding
		path.

											DISSOLVE TO:

	28.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - ANCHORHEAD SETTLEMENT

		A small settlement, consisting of a few run-down blockhouse-
		type buildings, rests against one of the huge rock mesas.
		The two robots study the sleepy little camp from a bluff
		some distance away.

							THREEPIO
					I don't like it.
					What if there are more Jawa-
					scavengers down there?

		The runt-like Artoo starts off down the side of the rocky
		bluff.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Wait a minute!It's too
					dangerous.  We need a plan...

		Threepio chases his little partner down the slope.

	29.  EXT. ANCHORHEAD SETTLEMENT - MAIN STREET

		The dozen or so buildings are bleached white by the two
		Utapau suns.  A harsh and dusty wind blows through the empty
		streets of the tiny settlement.  A rather frightened Threepio
		follows his little companion down the foreboding street to-
		ward a low concrete structure that is all but covered by the
		desert sands.  The rusted hulk of a powerful "landspeeder"
		(an auto-like transport which travels a few feet above the
		ground on a magnetic field) lies half-buried to one side of
		the building.  The two robots cautiously approach the dilapi-
		dated power station.

							THREEPIO
					I don't like this...

		It is quiet, but for the continual wind.  A dismantled speeder
		rests in the repair bay of the gas station-like building.
		There is a sharp dripping sound coming from the speeder. It
		appears that no one is around.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Greetings!...Greetings.  Is
					anyone home?
						(to Artoo)
					I think you're overheated.
					There is no one here...

		Out of the gloom of the office behind them, a voice cuts
		through the silence:

							VOICE (MECHANIC)
					What can I do you for?

		The robots turn around with a start.  A short, wizened old
		MECHANIC of sixty or seventy stands before them.

							MECHANIC (CONT'D)
					Who are you with?

							THREEPIO
					Greetings, sir.  I'm See Threepio,
					Human-Cyborg relations.  This is
					my counterpart, Artoo Detoo. Your
					kindness would be greatly appre-
					ciated...

		The old mechanic is a bit suspicious.  An evil look fills
		his eye.  He rubs his grimy, withered hand over Threepio's
		smooth metal shoulder.

							MECHANIC
					You're in very good shape for
					these parts...Where is your
					master?  You do have a master,
					don't you?

		Artoo beeps a few signals to his bronze friend.  The old
		mechanic begins to fiddle with the wrench he is holding,
		in the most unsettling way.  Threepio becomes a bit nervous.

							THREEPIO
					I am looking for one Owen Lars.
					We believe him to be of this
					settlement.  Do you know where
					we might find him?

		The mechanic starts dragging a heavy power-pack toward the
		station.

							MECHANIC
					Lars!  I should have known...He
					should know better than to let
					you travel alone.  He has a place
					about three measures out of town.
					Due north, you can't miss it. It's
					the only place out there...

		Artoo helps the old man with the heavy power pack.

							THREEPIO
					Your kindness is greatly appreciated.

							MECHANIC
					Any time I can help Lars, I am at
					his service.  You tell him that.
					Be careful going out there,
					this ain't good country for
					you two to be running loose
					in.

							THREEPIO
					Yes sir, we appreciate your
					concern.

		The two robots start down the empty street heading north,
		leaving the old mechanic scratching his head.  The old man
		passes a sinister-looking, black Imperial speeder half
		hidden behind a generator as he returns to his gloomy of-
		fice.

	30.  INT. POWER STATION OFFICE - ANCHORHEAD SETTLEMENT

		In the shadows of the dingy little office sits a large, burly
		Imperial "Tusken".  His reddish eyes are sunken in a larger
		than normal, dust-covered face.  He sits up in his chair.

							MECHANIC
					Now there's something "out of
					the ordinary" for you.  I wonder
					what they want with Lars?

		The gray Tusken thinks about this for a moment.

							TUSKEN
					I'd better make a report.

	31.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - WASTELAND - HOMESTEAD VALLEY

		Several concrete buildings squat in the middle of a desolate
		valley.  Threepio hurries after his determined companion as
		they near the low gray structures.

							THREEPIO
					...I don't care; he STILL could
					have offered us transport.  How
					much further do you suppose.
					I've got to rest, before I fall
					apart.  My joints are almost fro-
					zen.  What a forsaken place this
					is.  We seem to be made to suffer,
					it's our lot in life...

	32.  EXT. LARS HOMESTEAD - COURTYARD

		Artoo and Threepio enter the main courtyard of the Lars
		Homestead and find themselves standing in a sparse but spark-
		ling oasis, with low concrete walls and great turrets spill-
		ing over with foliage from rooftop gardens.  They stop be-
		fore an enormous shaded corridor. BIGGS AND WINDY STARKILLER,
		twin boys a little over seven years old, run through the
		long tile walkway to greet the robots.  Yelling and laughing,
		their tiny footsteps echo throughout the building.  They are
		quickly followed by OWEN LARS, a bearded, sturdy-burly man
		in his early fifties and his plump-jolly wife, BERU.  Their
		beautiful sixteen-year-old daughter, LEIA, stands shyly at
		the far end of the entry.  The twins run around the robots,
		jumping and screaming their excitement.  The mechanical men
		are somewhat befuddled by the dynamic duo, and attempt to
		ignore them.

							LARS
					Welcome.  May we offer you
					shelter?  Are you lost, or do
					you travel with someone?

							THREEPIO
					Greetings.  I am See Threepio,
					Human-Cyborg relations.  This
					is my counterpart, Artoo Detoo.
					We seek the dwelling of Owen
					Lars.

							LARS
					You have found it, my friends.
					I am Owen Lars...
						(to the riotous
						twins)
					Boys, slow down a little and
					let them speak...

							THREEPIO
					We have come for the one called
					"Angel Blue".

		Owen and Beru are startled at the mention of "Angel Blue".
		Leia approaches the group, and eyes the robots suspiciously;
		she turns to her father.

							LEIA
					Father, I think they're a trap,
					sent by an evil Jawa trading lord,
					or the dark master of the Bogan,
					or maybe even the Emperor himself.

							LARS
					Leia.

							LEIA
					Yes, that's it.  They've inter-
					cepted transmission fragments
					and are now searching the galaxy
					for the source.  They don't know
					the origin, so they have sent
					these...

							BERU
					Leia, please!  Let your father
					handle this.

							LARS
					Who speaks for you?  From what
					system do you hail?

							THREEPIO
					Deak 331-27-27 of Ogana Major...

		Beru's concern at the mention of Deak cannot be contained.

							BERU
					What has happened?  Where is
					Deak?

							THREEPIO
					Our master has been attacked
					My counterpart brings his mes-
					sage for the one called "Angel
					Blue".

							LARS
					Luke is in the southern ravine.
					The boys will take you to him.

		The two boys let out a cheer and run off toward the distant
		horizon.

							THREEPIO
					Your kindness is greatly appre-
					ciated.  We thank you...
						(turning to
						the boys)
					Wait!  Slow down a bit.

		The mechanical duo lumber off after the disappearing twins.

	33.  EXT. DESERT RAVINE

		Alone in a wind-swept canyon stands LUKE STARKILLER, a short,
		chubby boy about eighteen years old.  He seems frozen in
		place, a humming laser sword held high over his head.  The
		twins stop on the ridge overlooking their brother and fall
		silent.  The robots soon take up position behind them.

							THREEPIO
					Is that "Angel Blue"?

		Biggs turns and gestures to the tall bronze man to be quiet.
		Suspended at eye level -- about ten feet in front of Luke --
		a chrome baseball covered with antenna hovers slowly in a
		wide arc.  The ball floats to one side of the youth, then
		to the other.  Suddenly it makes a lightning swift lunge and
		stops within a few feet of Luke's face.  Luke doesn't move,
		and the ball backs off.  It slowly moves behind the boy,
		then makes another quick lunge, this time emitting a blood-
		red laser beam as it attacks.

		Luke sparks to life.  With one amazingly swift move, he
		turns and swings his laser sword, deflecting the beam, and
		losing his balance, tumbles to the desert floor.  The ball
		shoots straight up in the air about twenty feet, then drops
		like a rock firing a second laser bolt, which hits the youth
		square on the seat of his pants.  Luke lets out a painful
		yell and attempts to scramble to his feet, but is hit several
		more times before he manages to regain his balance and de-
		flect the bolts.

		The ball ceases firing, and moves back to its original posi-
		tion.  Luke raises his hand signaling "enough for one day".
		He wearily picks up his things, including the chrome ball,
		then turns and waves to the small group on the ridge.  The
		twins run down to greet him.  By the time the cumbersome
		Artoo and Threepio make it down the slope, Biggs and Windy
		are climbing all over their big brother.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					"Angel Blue"?...

							LUKE
					"...the skywalker"...

		The two robots make a short bow before the youth.

							THREEPIO
					See Threepio, and my counterpart
					Artoo Detoo.  At your service, sir.

							LUKE
					You have word of my brother.
					What has happened to him?

							THREEPIO
					I'm sorry, sir; but I am unable
					to explain the absence of our
					master.  We only bring his mes-
					sage...

		Artoo makes a few electronic beeps and whistles; then after
		a little static, a small (two foot) 3-D hologram of Deak is
		projected from the face of the robot.  The image is a rain-
		bow of color as it flickers and jiggles in the desert waste-
		land.

							DEAK'S IMAGE
					Whippersnapper, I didn't make
					it...I'm sorry.  The forces of
					the Bogan have become strong
					and deadly...I am lost.  Father
					is in grave danger.  He needs
					you and he needs the KIBER CRYSTAL.
					You must find a way to get to
					Ogana Major on your own.  He is
					waiting for you there.  Be care-
					ful, though.  Ogana Major is
					under siege by the Imperial
					Legions of Alderaan.  You must
					hurry for the force of the Ashla
					grows weak, and I don't know how
					much longer father can hold out.
					The enemy has constructed a power-
					ful weapon to use against him.
					Warn Uncle...

		An Aquillian officer enters the hologram and interrupts Deak.
		There is a little static, then the transmission is cut short.
		A grave concern sweeps over Luke as he contemplates the fate
		of his brother.  Biggs and Windy are puzzled.

							BIGGS
					Who was that?

							LUKE
					That was your brother Deak.  I
					wish you could see him in person,
					he is so terrific...I'm afraid
					you may never see him now.  Run
					to the house.
					Tell Aunt Beru or Uncle Owen
					I'm going to be awhile.  Go
					on now...Take them with you.

		The boys rush off with the robots in tow, leaving Luke sit-
		ting silently alone.  He picks up some small stones and be-
		gins to toss them at a large boulder.  A chip in the boulder
		reveals a small shiny fossil.  Luke spots it and goes over
		to study it.  He takes a small camera out of his bag and
		photographs it, making some accompanying notations in a small
		book.

	34.  INT. LARS HOMESTEAD - DINING AREA

		Owen Lars and the three boys sit before a table covered with
		steaming bowls of food.  Biggs and Windy are eating between
		giggles and horseplay.  Luke has barely touched his dinner.
		Leia enters from the kitchen with a flask filled with blue
		milk.  She sits near Luke.

							OWEN
					Where's the thanta sauce?
						(yelling into
						the other room)
					Honey, where's the thanta
					sauce?

		Beru enters carrying a small pitcher.  She gives Owen a
		knowing smile as she slides into her place at the table.

							BERU
					I never!  I put it right here
					in front so you'd see it.

		She hands him a dish, and he grunts an embarrassed reply.

							BERU (CONT'D)
					Luke, you've hardly touched
					your dinner.  Have some bum-bum
					extract.  It's very mild.

							OWEN
						(to Luke)
					The force of the Bogan is strong,
					and if you don't feel you can
					make it, you probably won't.

							LUKE
					I've never even been past this
					planet...and I never thought I'd
					be going alone.
					Suddenly I feel very small --
					and well...desperate.

							OWEN
					How I wish I had the counsel of
					your father.  Ever since your
					mother died, we have fallen on
					doubtful times...

							LUKE
					Deak is in trouble.  I should
					be helping him...

							OWEN
					If your brother is still alive,
					they will have taken him to the
					dungeons of ALDERAAN, at the
					very heart of the Empire.  No
					one, not even your father in his
					prime, could help him there.

		Biggs and Windy have finished eating and are getting restless.

							BIGGS
					May we play with the "droids"?

							BERU
					Take your plates out first.

		The twins scamper into the kitchen with their dirty dishes.

							OWEN
					Your father is getting very old.
					I fear he needs your help more
					than your brother does, and much
					more depends on him succeeding.
					If he at last has asked for the
					Kiber Crystal, his powers must
					be very weak.  It is a dangerous
					thing to have loose in the galaxy
					...and you need him, for you are
					not yet with the FORCE OF OTHERS.
					I have taught you the ways of a
					skilled warrior, but I am not a
					Jedi Bendu.  The ways of the
					spirit you must learn from your
					father.

							LUKE
					But my catalog on the ancients.
					I haven't nearly completed it...

							OWEN
					Luke, you're not a researcher,
					or a philosopher.  You're the
					son of a Jedi.  Your brothers
					accepted their destiny with joy
					and pride.  Anyone would.  Why
					can't you?

							LUKE
					I may be a good pilot, but I'm
					not a warrior.  No matter how
					hard I try.  It's just not in me.

							OWEN
					I know, you'd rather carve a jud
					stone, or work on your catalog of
					the ancients...I've trained seven
					of your father's sons and it's
					clear that you are not the most
					gifted in the disciplines -- not
					in power or speed, at any rate...

							LUKE
					Deak was the best; but that didn't
					seem to be good enough...

							BERU
					But you have the way about you...
					and wisdom far beyond your years...

							OWEN
					You must learn to use such strength
					and wits as you have.  Your father
					has need of the Kiber Crystal. The
					decision is yours.  I cannot bear
					this burden for you, my duty is to
					the twins.  But we must do something
					soon.  The enemy is moving, and we
					are no longer safe here.

		Leia listens to the discussion with much interest.  She
		watches Luke with un-concealed admiration.

							BERU
					Luke, if you do decide to go, re-
					member Ogana Major is far across
					the galaxy.
					Without Deak to help you, the
					way will be difficult, and
					chances of your reaching your
					father are slim.  Don't try it
					if you think you are going to
					fail.  The power of the Bogan
					force has grown strong; but if
					the Kiber Crystal were to fall
					into the hands of the enemy, all
					hope would be lost...

							OWEN
					Somehow, you will have to manage
					to find transport in MOS EISLEY,
					and once you do, the way through
					the Outland Systems will be dark
					and dangerous.  The wild things
					there are queer and savage, un-
					like anything you've experienced
					here.

		Leia is unable to control her concern.

							LEIA
					Luke, you don't even know the "grip
					of tython" or "the seven moves".
					You can't...

							OWEN
					Leia...

		Leia settles down, but she is clearly worried.  There is a
		long silence.  Owen sits back in his chair, and lights up
		his pipe.  The twins can be heard playing with Artoo and
		Threepio in the other room.  The silence becomes uncomfort-
		able.

							LUKE
					I suppose I must go...

		Tears begin to roll down Leia's cheeks, and she rushes from
		the room.  Beru looks to Owen, who looks to Luke, who looks
		embarrassed.

							BERU
					The prayers of all of us go
					with you.

							LUKE
					The Empire's vast size and power
					is its greatest weakness.  I
					think I can make it...But I would
					rather help Deak trapped in the
					heart of the Empire than face this
					father I don't remember.

		Owen gets up from the table and gently pats Luke on the
		shoulder.

	35.  EXT. LARS HOMESTEAD - GRAVE SITE - DUSK

		Luke sits before a tall smooth stone planted on a burial
		mound.  He sits with his head bowed to his knees.  Finally
		he stands up and speaks to the stone.

							LUKE
					Well, Mom. I guess this is my last
					visit...I'm going to finally get
					to meet him...I fear many Jedi have
					fallen since your death, for the
					Bogan force is now heavy among us.
					Father asks for the Kiber Crystal
					so there is little hope.  I'm sure
					the boys will stay safe with Uncle
					Owen...I sure miss you...

		The twin suns of Utapau rest red on the horizon as Luke
		leaves the grave site and walks the short distance to the
		main house.

	36.  INT. LARS HOMESTEAD - MAIN LIVING AREA - DUSK

		The main living area is a dim, cool room projecting a feel-
		ing of time-worn comfort and security. Owen lovingly moves
		his arm around Beru as they stand before a large window
		watching the giant twin suns of Utapau slowly disappear be-
		hind a distant dune range.


							BERU
					Aren't they beautiful?

							OWEN
					"Always and never the same."

							BERU
					Must we leave?

							OWEN
					I think with Luke going, we'll
					be safe here for awhile.  We've
					been the happiest here, haven't
					we...

							BERU
					Owen, he's not ready, is he?...
					Why don't you stop him?  What
					was Deak thinking of to place
					such an impossible task before
					his brother...

		The door opens and Luke enters, collapsing in a large, over-
		stuffed chair near a pot-belly thermal-heater which dominates
		the room.  A warm friendly glow radiates from a tiny portal
		in front of the heater.  Luke's gaze is fixed on the red em-
		bers, but his eyes are lit as if by a greater fire from
		within.

		Owen and Beru talk quietly in the background.  She rests her
		head on his shoulder as the last rays of sunlight stream
		across the floor of the room.  A playful Biggs and Windy
		enter with Leia and stand in the doorway.  The twins are
		dressed in their night clothes.

							BIGGS
					What's going on in here?

		Luke returns from his world of dark thoughts and smiles at
		them.  The twins rush up to Owen and Beru, give them a kiss,
		then bounce over to Luke, and jump into his lap.

							BERU
					Don't be too late now.

		Owen and Beru take Leia into the other room.

							WINDY
					Why are you going away?

							LUKE
					Because our father needs me,
					as he will need you someday.

							BIGGS
					I thought our father was killed?

							LUKE
					The time has come for me to
					tell you of your heritage, as
					Deak told it to me and as his
					older brother Cliegg told it
					to him.

		The boys settle down and listen attentively.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					In another time, long before
					the Empire, and before the
					Republic had been formed, a
					holy man called the Skywalker
					became aware of a powerful
					energy field which he believed
					influenced the destiny of all
					living creatures...

							BIGGS
					The "FORCE OF OTHERS"!

							LUKE
					Yes, and after much study, he
					was able to know the force, and
					it communicated with him.  He
					came to see things in a new way.
					His "aura" and powers grew very
					strong.  The Skywalker brought a
					new life to the people of his
					system, and became one of the
					founders of the Republic Galactica.

							WINDY
					The "FORCE OF OTHERS" talked to
					him!?!

							LUKE
					In a manner different from the way
					we talk.  As you know, the "FORCE
					OF OTHERS" has two halves: Ashla,
					the good, and Bogan, the paraforce
					or evil part.  Fortunately, Skywalker
					came to know the good half and was
					able to resist the paraforce; but
					he realized that if he taught others
					the way of the Ashla, some, with
					less strength, might come to know
					Bogan, the dark side, and bring un-
					thinkable suffering to the Universe.
					For this reason, the Skywalker
					entrusted the secret of THE
					FORCE only to his twelve children,
					and they in turn passed on the
					knowledge only to their children,
					who became known as the Jedi Bendu
					of the Ashla: "the servants of
					the force".  For thousands of
					years, they brought peace and
					justice to the galaxy.  At one
					time there were several hundred
					Jedi families, but now there are
					only two or three.

							WINDY
					What happened to them?

							LUKE
					As the Republic spread throughout
					the galaxy, encompassing over a
					million worlds, the GREAT SENATE
					grew to such overwhelming propor-
					tions that it no longer responded
					to the needs of its citizens.
					After a series of assassinations
					and elaborately rigged elections,
					the Great Senate became secretly
					controlled by the Power and Trans-
					port guilds.  When the Jedi dis-
					covered the conspiracy and attempted
					to purge the Senate, they were de-
					nounced as traitors.  Several Jedi
					allowed themselves to be tried and
					executed, but most of them fled
					into the Outland systems and tried
					to tell people of the conspiracy.
					But the elders chose to remain behind,
					and the Great Senate diverted them
					by creating civil disorder.  The
					Senate secretly instigated race wars,
					and aided anti-government terrorists.
					They slowed down the system of jus-
					tice, which caused the crime rate
					to rise to the point where a totally
					controlled and oppressive police
					state was welcomed by the systems.
					The Empire was born.  The systems
					were exploited by a new economic
					policy which raised the cost of
					power and transport to unbelievable
					heights.
					Many worlds were destroyed this
					way.  Many people starved...

							BIGGS
					Why didn't the "FORCE OF OTHERS"
					help the Jedi to put things right?

							LUKE
					Because a terrible thing happened.
					During one of his lessons a young
					PADAWAN-JEDI, a boy named Darklighter,
					came to know the evil half of the
					force, and fell victim to the spell
					of the dreaded Bogan.  He ran away
					from his instructor and taught the
					evil ways of the Bogan Force to a
					clan of Sith pirates, who then
					spread untold misery throughout
					the systems.  They became the per-
					sonal bodyguards of the Emperor.
					The Jedi were hunted down by these
					deadly Sith knights.  With every
					Jedi death, contact with the Ashla
					grows weaker, and the force of the
					Bogan grows more powerful.

							WINDY
					Where are the Jedi now?

							LUKE
					They're hidden; but many are still
					fighting to free the systems from
					the grip of the Empire.  Our father
					is a Jedi.  He is called "The
					Starkiller" and is said to be a
					great and wise man, and tomorrow
					I am on my way to join him and
					learn the ways of the "FORCE OF
					OTHERS".

							BIGGS
					Can we go, too?

							LUKE
					Not yet, Biggs my boy.  There is
					much you must learn from Uncle
					Owen -- where it is safe.  And
					when you are ready, I will come
					back for you...I promise.

	37.  EXT. LARS HOMESTEAD - COURTYARD - DAWN

		Early morning breaks across the quiet little courtyard as
		Owen and Luke lift supplies into the back of a low, bat-
		tered, two-man landspeeder.  Threepio lifts Artoo into a
		tiny jump-seat, then climbs into the passenger compartment.
		Beru, Leia, and the twins stand in the entryway, silently
		watching. The storage hatch is slammed shut with a bang.
		Owen unfastens his gun-belt and hands it to Luke.  He slides
		back a small latch on the belt buckle revealing a small
		diamond-like crystal.  Luke carefully examines it.

							LUKE
					The Kiber Crystal!

							OWEN
					The only one.  A Jedi can use
					it to intensify the Ashla force
					a hundred fold; but, remember it
					can also be used to intensify the
					power of the Bogan...It must not
					fall into the hands of the Sith...
					They would do anything to have it.

		Luke stands looking at the Crystal for a few moments, then
		snaps the buckle closed and puts on the belt.

							OWEN (CONT'D)
					The enemy is everywhere, so stay
					alert.  If you keep due south, you
					should make it in two days at the
					most.  I just hope you can sell this
					bucket for enough to get you to the
					Ogana System...

		For a few awkward moments, Luke stands looking at everyone
		not really wanting to say goodbye.

							OWEN (CONT'D)
					It's a good day to travel. The
					FORCE OF OTHERS is surely with
					you.  We'll be moving on soon.
					I will send word once we're
					settled...

		Luke shakes his hand, and Owen gives him a big hug.  The young
		adventurer then goes to his Aunt Beru and gives her a kiss
		and a hug.

							BERU
					The spaceport at Mos Eisley is
					not a decent place.  Be careful
					there.

							LUKE
					I'll watch out, Aunt Beru.
					Don't worry.

		He lovingly roughs up the twins, and starts to give Leia a
		kiss, but thinks better of it and gives her a short polite
		hug before retreating to the speeder.  Leia is greatly dis-
		appointed.

							OWEN
					Wish your father well.

							BERU
					May the FORCE OF OTHERS be
					with you.

		Luke pops open the door of the speeder; but before he can
		get in, Leia runs up and gives him a big kiss.  Luke is sur-
		prised and embarrassed.  Beru and Owen smile, as Leia rushes
		back into the house.  Luke settles into the speeder and it
		starts with a crack and loud whine.  Everyone waves as the
		speeder roars out of the courtyard, and into the desolate
		Utapau wilderness.

	38.  EXT. LANDSPEEDER - TRAVELING

		The sleek landspeeder glides effortlessly through the
		treacherous rock canyons and out onto the awesome dune sea.
		The vibrations of the speeder causes Artoo's outer shell to
		rattle a rhythmic little tune.

							LUKE
					How long were you with my
					brother?

							THREEPIO
					I had the pleasure of serving
					Master Deak for over three years
					...my counterpart was with him
					a bit longer.

		Artoo chatters to his bronze interpreter.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					...Three years eight months.
					Master Deak is a man above men.
					You should be proud of him,
					indeed you should, sir.  I'm
					only a "droid", and not much
					more than an interpreter, and
					not very good at poetry, if you
					take my meaning -- not at making
					it up anyway.
					So I can't tell you what he's
					really like.  But a great man
					he is!  Strong...with great
					skill...I hope he's not in
					peril...what a dilemma! Some-
					times the logic of human rela-
					tions escapes me...

		Luke thinks about this for a few moments; then rather reluc-
		tantly, almost afraid, he asks a second question.

							LUKE
					Have you ever met my father?

							THREEPIO
					No, I'm afraid not, sir.  I
					couldn't even tell you what he
					looks like.  He's an elusive one.
					More of a myth than a man, if I
					may say so, sir...But Master Deak
					always spoke of him with great
					respect...

		Luke seems a little disappointed with Threepio's answer.

	39.  EXT. DUNE SEA

		The small speeder sits at the bottom of a huge sand dune.
		Luke, with his extremely long-barreled laser rifle slung
		over his shoulder, makes his way to the top of the ridge.
		He studies the landscape with his electro-binoculars, until
		he spots a small dust twister speeding toward them.  He
		quickly slides back down the dune to where Threepio is lift-
		ing Artoo out of the speeder.  The stubby little robot
		struts around stretching his joints between irritated whis-
		tles.

							LUKE
					You were right, there is some-
					thing following us.  We'd better
					move on.

							THREEPIO
					Who do you suppose it is?  Do you
					think they're looking for us?

							LUKE
					It's probably nothing.  A "jom-
					trader" most likely; but I have
					a strange feeling about it.

											DISSOLVE TO:

	40.  EXT. PLANET UTAPAU - MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT

		The speeder stops on a bluff overlooking the spaceport at
		MOS EISLEY.  It is a haphazard array of low gray concrete
		structures and semi-domes.  A harsh gale blows across the
		bleak canyon floor and batters Luke as he lowers his sand
		goggles and walks to the edge of the craggy bluff.  A
		leaden sky presses down on the large settlement, which seems
		to be losing a never-ending battle against the shifting
		sands.  Something in the distance catches his eye, and he
		instinctively grabs his electrobinoculars.  He follows a
		sinister-black "tusken" landspeeder as it enters the space-
		port.  Luke returns to his speeder, and his two mechanical
		companions.

							LUKE
					Well, whoever was following us
					has gone into Mos Eisley...they
					weren't "jom traders", that's
					for sure...It was a speeder of
					the Imperial starforce...

	41.  EXT. MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT - SLUM DWELLINGS

		Luke stops the speeder before the remains of a burnt-out
		spaceship the size of a large jet fighter.  Two scruffy
		figures huddle around a small thermal-heater, attempting
		to use the spacecraft as shelter against the howling winds.
		One of the rag-tag figures gets up and ventures over to
		Luke in the speeder.  When the shabby beggar stands up, it
		is obvious from his pint size that he is a Jawa.  Artoo
		lets out a string of electronic beeps and whistles.

							THREEPIO
					I begging your pardon, sir, but
					watch out for this guy.

		The wretched little creature moves close to the speeder and
		begins to run his gnarled little hand across it.

							LUKE
					Where might I find passage on a
					starship?

							JAWA
					Nice zoom zoom.

							LUKE
					Where are the men who fly in the
					ships?

		Saliva dribbles from the dark hole where the Jawa's face
		should be and drops, splat, on the hood of the speeder.

							JAWA
					Drink place.  Drink place down
					the street.  Nice zoom zoom.

		The Jawa continues to fondle the speeder as Luke starts the
		magno-system.  The filthy little creature reluctantly jumps
		away as the speeder takes off and glides down the dismal
		spaceport street.

	42.  EXT. MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT - CANTINA

		The speeder pulls up in front of a run-down, blockhouse can-
		tina on the outskirts of the spaceport.  Various strange
		forms of transport, including several unusual beasts of bur-
		den, are parked outside the bar.

							THREEPIO
					I can't abide those Jawas. Dis-
					gusting creatures.

							LUKE
					Take care in here.  I don't like
					the looks of this place.

		As the trio exit the speeder, an ancient human shrouded in
		gray robes, sitting near the entrance to the cantina calls
		out to them.  The man appears to be a blind beggar.

							SEER
					Come to me and the truth shall
					be known.

		Luke reluctantly approaches the old man.

							SEER (CONT'D)
					I've seen what is to be.  I can
					tell you what you need to know...

		Luke drops several coins in the man's open palm.

							LUKE
					Can you tell me where I might find
					transport to Ogana Major?

							SEER
					Your fate is clouded...but the will
					of the force has set your path. The
					man you seek you'll find inside;
					the one who needs you, you'll find
					in time.
					Fear not, for the "son of the
					suns" will free us all.  Take
					care for the Bogan is heavy
					upon this system.  May the
					FORCE OF OTHERS be with you.

		Luke is somewhat puzzled by the old man's dialogue.

							THREEPIO
					A profoundly illogical answer.
					He's not completely with us, if
					you take my meaning.

	43.  INT. SPACEPORT CANTINA

		The young adventurer and his two mechanical servants enter
		the smoke-filled cantina.  The murky, moldy den is filled
		with a startling array of weird and exotic alien creatures
		and monsters, laughing at the long metallic bar.  At first,
		the sight is horrifying.  One-eyed, thousand-eyed, slimy,
		furry, scaly tentacles and claws huddle over drinks.  Luke
		moves to an empty spot at the bar near a group of repulsive
		but human Corellian pirates.  A huge, rough-looking BAR-
		TENDER comes over to Luke and the robots.

							BARTENDER
					We don't serve "their kind" in
					here.

		Luke, still recovering from the shock of seeing so many out-
		landish creatures in one room, doesn't quite catch the bar-
		tender's drift.

							LUKE
					What?

							BARTENDER
					Your "Droids" will have to wait
					outside.  We don't serve 'em
					here.

		Luke notices that several of the creatures along the bar are
		giving them a very unfriendly glare.

							LUKE
					Yes, of course, I'm so sorry.
						(he turns to
						Threepio)
					You'd better stay with the
					speeder.
					We don't want any trouble...
					I'll bring you something...

							THREEPIO
					I must say, I agree, sir.

		Threepio and his stubby partner go outside, and most of the
		creatures at the bar go back to their drinks.  Luke is stand-
		ing next to HAN SOLO, a young Corellian pirate only a few
		years older than himself.  He is a burly-bearded but ruggedly
		handsome boy dressed in a gaudy array of flamboyant apparel.

							LUKE
					Do you know of any ship heading
					toward the
					Ogana Systems?

		Han Solo eyes him suspiciously.

							HAN
					What's your business, little one?

		Han turns to his companion, CHEWBACCA, an eight foot tall,
		savage-looking creature resembling a huge gray bush-baby
		monkey with fierce "baboon"-like fangs.  His large yellow
		eyes dominate a fur-covered face and soften his otherwise
		awesome appearance.  Over his matted, furry body, he wears
		two chrome bandoliers, a flak jacket painted in a bizarre
		camouflage pattern, brown cloth shorts, and little else.
		He is a two-hundred-year-old "WOOKIEE", and a sight to be-
		hold.  Han speaks to the Wookiee in his own language, which
		is little more than a series of grunts.  The young pirate
		points to Luke several times during his conversation and
		the creature suddenly lets out a horrifying laugh.  Han
		chuckles to himself and turns back to Luke.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					What would you be doing going
					on such a trip?  Ogana Major
					is part of the Alliance...You
					wouldn't be one of those rebels,
					would yuh, little one?

		He can't control his laughter, and Chewbacca starts in again,
		also.  Luke is getting a little worried.

							LUKE
					I just want passage.

		Han puts his arm around Luke's shoulder and draws him near.

							HAN
					Listen, little one, why don't
					you go on back to the farm or
					wherever you come from.  Then
					maybe in a few years you'll
					grow up to become an important
					starpilot, like me.

		He lets out a hearty laugh and turns back to the giant Wookiee.
		Luke is afraid, but tries not to show it.  He quietly sips
		his drink, looking over the crowd for a more sympathetic ear,
		or whatever.  A large multiple-eyed creature on the other side
		of Luke gives him a rather rough shove.

							CREATURE
					Negola dughi wooldugger?!?

		The hideous freak is obviously drunk.  Luke tries to ignore
		the creatures and turns back to his drink.  A short grubby
		HUMAN and an even smaller rodent-like beast join the belli-
		gerent monstrosity.

							HUMAN
					He doesn't like you.

							LUKE
					I'm sorry.

							HUMAN
					I don't like you either.

		The big creature is getting agitated, and yells some unin-
		telligible gibberish at the now rather nervous young Jedi.

							HUMAN (CONT'D)
					Don't insult us.  You just watch
					yourself.  We're wanted men. I
					have the death sentence on twelve
					systems.

							LUKE
					I'11 be careful then.

							HUMAN
					You'll be dead.

		The rodent lets out a loud grunt and everything at the bar
		moves away.  Luke tries to remain cool, but it isn't easy.

		His three adversaries ready their weapons.  Han Solo, who
		has been watching the chain of events, begins to feel sorry
		for the young tenderfoot and intervenes.

							HAN
					This little one isn't worth
					the effort.  Besides, he's
					leaving.  Come, let me buy
					you something.

		A powerful blow from the unpleasant creature sends the young
		Corellian pirate sailing across the room, crashing through
		tables and breaking a large jug filled with a foul-looking
		liquid.  With a blood-curdling shriek, the monster draws a
		wicked chrome laser pistol from his belt.  The bartender
		panics!

							BARTENDER
					No blasters!!  No blaster!
					Please!

		Little Luke's laser sword sparks to life, and in a flash,
		an arm lies on the floor.  The rodent is cut in two, and the
		giant, multiple-eyed creature lies doubled, cut from chin
		to groin.  Luke shaking, and somewhat amazed at his reflex
		powers, replaces his sword in its sheath.  The entire fight
		has lasted only a matter of seconds.  The cantina goes back
		to normal, although Luke is now given a respectable amount
		of room at the bar.  Han, rubbing his bruised head, approaches
		the "little one" with new awe.  The bartender drags the
		bodies out.

							HAN
					I could have saved myself a good
					bump if I had known your skill...

							LUKE
					I thank you for trying to help.

							HAN
					They're lucky they caught me off
					guard.  I would have taken more
					time with them.  It's the Bogan
					force.  We've been feeling it for
					several days.  It drives those
					MONDUTHS wild...I'm Han Solo.
					This is my first-mate Chewbacca.

		Luke is still giddy, and downs a fresh drink.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					So you're looking for transport
					to Ogana...I might be able to
					help, but it's very far -- the
					cost would be great.

							LUKE
					I can pay.  You know of a ship
					going in that direction?

							HAN
					In these times, one cannot be
					too careful, you understand --
					going into a rebel zone and all
					-- but come to my place.  We'll
					have some food and talk this over.

		Luke is filled with grateful enthusiasm at his new-found
		"friends" and ignores their sinister grins.

	44.  EXT. MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT - ALLEYWAY

		Han, Chewbacca, Luke and the robots walk along a narrow slum
		alleyway crowded with darkly-clad creatures hawking exotic
		goods in dingy little stalls.  Men and monsters crouch in
		waste-filled doorways whispering and hiding from the chill-
		ing winds.  They enter a small doorway in a decaying stone
		building at the far end of the alley.

	45.  INT. SLUM DWELLING - LIVING AREA

		The seedy slum dwelling is dark and dingy.  Han is greeted
		by a female "Boma" named OEETA.  The Boma is a fur-covered
		creature about five feet high and looks like a cross between
		a brown bear and a guinea pig.  It is obvious from her figure
		that she is a female.  Han embraces Oeeta and gives her a
		big kiss, then checks out the stew-like mess boiling away
		on a dilapidated fusion-burner in the kitchen area.

							HAN
					Good, good...We're hungry.
					Bring my friends some of this.

		She answers in a strange baboon-like call and starts dish-
		ing up the slop.  Threepio and Artoo cautiously dust off a
		bench in the kitchen and sit down.  Luke and Chewbacca join
		Han at a large table in the center of the main room.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					Now tell me of your adventures.
					What is on Ogana Major that draws
					you there?

							LUKE
					I am looking to join my father.
					I have been living with my uncle,
					beyond the Great Dune sea.  He
					has a small moisture ranch --
					not much of an adventure, I'm
					afraid.

							HAN
					Ahh, no farmer could cut down
					three brigands as you did.  But,
					as you wish.  In time you will
					grow to trust me...

		Oeeta brings them each a steaming bowl of "Boma-mush", and
		a large mug of some heavy brew.  Chewbacca and Han dig in
		with great vigor, but Luke is a little hesitant.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					Eat up, don't let its smell
					bother you...Now, for the right
					sum, I could take you to Ogana
					Major myself.  But it would be a
					special charter.  I have no other
					business in that area, and the way
					is a little dangerous.

							LUKE
					How much?

							HAN
					An even million, I think.  We will
					have to somehow sneak past the
					Imperial blockade.  It won't be
					easy.

							LUKE
					A million!  I haven't that much.
					I hope to get one fifty for my
					speeder...but that's all I have.

							HAN
					Well, I doubt you'll find another
					ship to take you.  Most captains
					rarely venture there.  The civil
					war makes it far too dangerous...
					I was sure a man of your
					abilities would be worth more.
					What of your two "droids" --
					you could get at least four or
					five for them...even if you sold
					them as scrap.

		Artoo and Threepio become suddenly attentive and listen
		closely to the conversation in the next room.  Artoo begins
		to beep, but Threepio puts his bronze hand over his little
		companion's mouth.  Luke thinks about this for a moment.

							LUKE
					No...I need them.  What if I
					were to pay you one fifty now,
					and my father gave you the rest
					on our arrival?  He is an honor-
					able man of great influence.  I'm
					sure he would make it worth your
					while.

		The two robots breathe a sigh of relief.  Han's waning in-
		terest is renewed by the mention of "great influence".

							HAN
					You mean a bonus maybe.  Your
					father must be a man of great
					wealth?

							LUKE
					I'm sure he would reward you.

		Han thinks about this for a few moments, then turns to
		Chewbacca and seemingly explains the situation to him.  The
		Wookiee shrugs his shoulders as if to say "Why not?"

							HAN
					We've got a deal then.  Sell your
					speeder and I'll meet you at dock-
					ing port twenty-three.  My ship
					will be ready and waiting for you.
					We should go right away, I think.

	46.  EXT. MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT - DOCKING PORT 23

		Han and his lumbering first-mate Chewbacca hurry along be-
		hind MONTROSS HOLDAACK, a large, portly man who walks with
		a stiff, awkward gait.  They move along a tall gantry over-
		looking a long, complex spacecraft.

							HAN
					But you're my friend, my best and
					closest partner.  Oxus will still
					listen to you!  He will, I tell
					you, I know he will.  I really have
					a live one this time.  I asked for
					a million, and he didn't even flinch,
					and the way he fights -- he must
					belong to one of the royal families,
					I'm just sure of it.  This may be
					worth two million, maybe three.
					You've got to talk to Oxus...You've
					just got to...

							MONTROSS
					Like your information on the AKURIAN
					spice shipment...After that botch,
					if I WERE crazy enough to suggest
					another one of your plots to him,
					he'd have us both diced...

							HAN
					But this is different.  This is
					our chance.  Are we partners or
					not?  Are you going to dream away
					the rest or your life, or are we
					going to try for the big one?

							MONTROSS
					The only way Oxus would go along is
					if you killed him...I'm too old,
					Han.  I can't do it, you'll have to
					find someone else.

							HAN
					There's no time.  What kind of talk
					is this?  Where's the old Montross
					that single-handedly destroyed a
					colony of Banthas and rescued me
					from the very jaws of death??
					Montross, the greatest science
					officer in the galaxy, too old?!

							MONTROSS
					You young fool!

		Montross suddenly ignites in a rage and swings his left
		forearm down with a mighty blow across the metal rail of
		the gantry. The old science officer's forearm cracks in
		two, spewing forth wires, and many fine multi-colored elec-
		tronic components.

		The artificial limb flops lifelessly to Montross Holdaack's
		side.

							MONTROSS (CONT'D)
					You know, there is nothing left
					but my head and right arm...
					I've lost too much, Han...I'm
					dying...I'm dying this time...
					I'm losing control.

		Han bows his head in sorrow and embarrassment for one of the
		greatest warriors in the galaxy and a dear friend.

							HAN
					Take it easy...I'm sorry.  Don't
					be upset.  What am I going to do?
					He's going to be here shortly
					wanting to go to Ogana!  I'll
					just have to talk to Oxus myself.
					I'll take care of everything.
					We'll get you fixed up, once and
					for all.

	47.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - ENTRY BAY

		The entry bay of the large starship is also the main lounge
		area of the ship.  Two gruff and grisly pirates are playing
		a kind of dice game with thin little sticks.  The larger
		and mangiest of the two slavering hulks, JABBA THE HUTT
		by name, throws his dice at Chewbacca.

							JABBA
					I told you not to bring that
					thing on board again...Where
					have you been anyway...Captain
					wants the conveyor system ex-
					tended...and I notice you haven't
					turned around those punch chips
					yet.  What are we keeping you
					on board for anyway?

		Chewbacca slinks back outside the starship as Han helps the
		still slightly crazed Montross aboard the craft.  Han gen-
		erally ignores Jabba's tirade.

							HAN
					Where is everybody, anyway?

							JABBA
					They took the shipment of "Covina"
					to Gordon.
					But the captain is still here,
					so get to work or I'll snap you
					myself.

							HAN
					Where is he?

							JABBA
					On the bridge, I think.  I
					wouldn't go looking for trouble,
					though...He'll sting you good
					if you bother him.

		The second pirate notices Montross's arm, as Han sets him
		on a bench near the door.

							PIRATE
					Montross fall apart again?

							JABBA
					What's this ship coming to?
					We've got a good-for-nothing
					"cabin boy" and a disintegrating
					science officer.

	48.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT

		The cockpit of the starship is crowded with a haphazard ar-
		ray of computer switches and monitors.  Dozing in one of
		the two pilot chairs is CAPTAIN OXUS, a man of the grossest
		dimensions.  His scarred face is a grim testimonial to his
		prowess as a pirate and a killer.  The young Han Solo en-
		ters the cabin and stands staring at the evil galactic
		buccaneer -- the terror of the Outland territories -- so
		peaceful, such an easy prey.  Han doesn't know quite what
		to do, so he starts to leave. Oxus opens one eye.  He is
		in a drunken stupor.

							OXUS
					What have you been up to, boy??
					You finished with the conveyor
					system?  Bring me some more
					"Auraspice"!

		Han bows low before his master, then moves down the narrow
		passageway to a small closet, where he takes out a cup of
		silver powder and returns to Oxus.

							HAN
					Your spice; sir...Ah, sir, may I...

							OXUS
					You blasted, good-for-nothing.
					Go fetch my tallock!  And be
					quick.  Now get out of here!

		He takes a mighty swing at the boy, but his inebriated con-
		dition causes the blow to ricochet off, and slam against a
		locker panel.  Han rushes out of the room.

	49.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - HALLWAY

		Han is angry with himself for not being able to tell the
		captain about Luke.  He kicks the door to a locker in dis-
		gust.  Suddenly an idea comes to him and he rushes back
		down the hallway.

	50.  EXT. MOS EISLEY SPACEPORT - DOCKING PORT 23

		Luke and the two robots approach the entry bay of the giant
		starship, and are intercepted by the giant Wookiee, Chewbacca.

							LUKE
					Greetings!  For such a young
					captain, your master has a
					mighty ship.  Will you store
					our bags?

		Luke hands the huge funny creature his back-pack, but the
		Wookiee doesn't take it. Instead, Chewbacca refuses to let
		them pass and carries on about something in his harsh na-
		tive tongue.  Luke doesn't understand.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					I don't get it??  Are we to wait
					here, or what?  Threepio, what's
					he talking about?

		The gleaming bronze robot jabbers away in strange animal
		sounds to the towering monster.  They carry on an animated
		argument, until it appears Threepio gets in the last word.

							THREEPIO
					Well, master Luke, sir.  It ap-
					pears we must wait out here for
					the captain to ready the ship.
					I told him we weren't accustomed
					to waiting around on gantries;
					and if you beg my pardon, sir,
					for the price of this trip they
					should have picked you up in an
					environment capsule, complete
					with dancing "Yonnas".

	51.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - HALLWAY

		Han and Montross are busy prying loose a control panel in
		a forward corridor of the ship.  The cover falls to the
		floor with a loud clang, and the young cabin boy looks
		around to see if anyone heard.  Montross takes a small metal
		bar and jams it between two circuits.  Sparks, fly and a
		small puff of smoke issues from the panel.  He quickly re-
		places the cover and Han heads back toward the captain's
		bridge.

	52.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT

		The cockpit area of the starship is a cacophony of warning
		alarms and flashing lights.  The captain clumsily works at
		the control console in a vain attempt to figure out what
		is going on.  Han enters carrying a long gray cloak.

							HAN
					Your tallock, sir.  What's wrong??

		Oxus stumbles around in a drunken stupor.

							OXUS
					Something's fouled up on this
					blasted board...

							HAN
					The reactor's wild!  It's way over
					a thousand.  We'd better get out.

							OXUS
					That's impossible!  I may be under
					the influence, but the reactor
					couldn't have gotten loose...Wait
					a minute.

		A new shrill alarm begins to sound, as Han grabs the groggy
		old pirate and drags him out of the cabin.

	53.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - ENTRY BAY

		Han and the lumbering pirate captain charge into the entry
		bay, almost knocking down Jabba the Hutt.

							JABBA
					What's going on?

							HAN
					Sabotage!  The reactor's have gone
					wild.  Get out.  Get out...Wait, I
					forgot about Montross...

		Jabba the Hutt and the other pirate stumble over each other,
		racing for the exit.  Little Artoo scoots out of the way
		just as the two pirates rush past the group and into the
		spacestation main building.  They are quickly followed by
		the wobbly captain.  Luke watches the trio with puzzled
		amazement as the blast door slides closed behind them.
		Chewbacca gets a message on his belt com-link, and gestures
		to Luke that they should enter the deserted starship.  Luke
		and the two robots reluctantly follow the giant Wookiee
		into the entry bay.  Chewbacca pushes a button, and the main
		hatch slams shut. The alarms continue to ring.

							LUKE
					Where's the captain?

		Threepio repeats the question in Wookieese and gets a short,
		rather menacing answer from the creature, who points to the
		high-backed seat of the lounge area.

							THREEPIO
					He wants us to sit down, sir...
					If we don't mind.  The captain
					will be with us shortly.

		The alarm signal is suddenly cut short.

	54.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT

		The one armed Montross sits in the pilot seat pushing but-
		tons and switches.  Han rushes in and sits in the co-pilot
		seat.  He is laughing.

							HAN
					Alarms secure...ready for take-
					off...let's get out of here be-
					fore they figure out what happened.

							MONTROSS
					Yes sir, captain.

		Montross laughs heartily as he pulls back on the throttle.
		The ship shudders as it lifts off.

	55.  INT. DOCKING PORT 23 - MAIN BUILDING

		Captain Oxus and Jabba the Hutt stand before a large window
		overlooking the docking port.  Oxus is furious, ranting and
		raving.  Jabba stands dumbfoundedly, with his mouth hanging
		open.  The ship quickly disappears into the vastness of the
		night sky.

	56.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING

		Han sits back in the huge co-pilot's chair and puts his
		feet up on the control console.

							HAN
					Sometimes I amaze myself...

		He chuckles.  The surface of Utapau slowly drifts out of
		view of the cockpit windows and is replaced by a sparkling
		carpet of stars.

							MONTROSS
					Are you even a little worried
					he might hunt you down?

							HAN
					Well, Montross my friend, it's a
					big universe.  And after we cash
					in on this young noble, we'll
					head for Ophichi or one of the
					other southern systems.  He'll
					be a long time coming there!

							MONTROSS
					Sometimes you amaze me, also.

		They both laugh.  Little Artoo appears momentarily in the
		doorway, makes a few beeping remarks, then scurries away.
		In a few moments, Luke appears at the doorway.

							LUKE
					This is a terrific ship!  How did
					you ever come by it?

		Montross gives Han a sly smile, as Artoo appears timidly
		behind his master.

							HAN
					It's a long story...I suggest you
					relax.  We'll be going into a
					Hyper-skip soon, and should reach
					Ogana Major by 0300, two para-marks
					from now.

	57.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - SLEEP AREA

		Han stands nervously waiting for Chewbacca, who is looking
		through Luke's things as the young adventurer sleeps.  The
		huge furry creature is very quiet as he moves about the
		cabin.  He picks up Luke's gun belt containing the hidden
		Kiber Crystal.  He takes the belt and a pouch to his wait-
		ing master, and quietly whispers to him.  Han begins to
		search the belt.

							HAN
					He must have SOMETHING of value.
					Are you sure you looked through
					everything?  His father had bet-
					ter be loaded.

		He drops the belt and pouch in disgust.

	58.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING IN SPACE

		Han enters and flops down in the co-pilot's seat.  Montross
		is busy studying the solar system with the ship's scanner.

							HAN
					We've been through everything
					twice.  He has nothing with him.
					I guess we'll just have to wait
					until we get to his father.

		Montross looks up from the scanner with a worried look.

							MONTROSS
					I've scanned almost all the way
					to Ogana Major, and there is no
					blockade!  I don't get it.  Do
					you think we should continue?

							HAN
					Sure, why not?...but carefully.

	59.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

		Luke, Chewbacca and the two robots sit around a lighted
		table covered with many small metal figures. Each side of
		the table has a small computer monitor embedded in it.
		Chewbacca seems very pleased with himself as he rests his
		lanky fur-covered arms over his head.  Luke rests his chin
		in his hands as he ponders a weighty problem on the board.
		Finally the stubby Artoo reaches up and moves one of the
		figures on the board.  A sudden frown crosses Chewbacca's
		face and he begins yelling some gibberish at Artoo.  Threepio
		intercedes on behalf of his small companion and begins to
		argue with the huge Wookiee.

							LUKE
					Let him have it...You're winning
					anyway...It doesn't make any dif-
					ference.

							THREEPIO
					Yes sir, but it's the principle of
					the thing.

		A small tone sounds and the com-link crackles to life.

							HAN'S VOICE
					Luke, could you come up here!

							LUKE
					I'm on my way.

	60.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING IN SPACE

		The cockpit is alive with humming meters and softly buzz-
		ing read-outs.  Montross and Han are busy at the controls.

							MONTROSS
					It checks out again.  There is
					no mistake about it.

		Luke enters; his boyish enthusiasm is working overtime.

							LUKE
					We must be just about there!

		Both Han and Montross are rather grim-faced.

							HAN
					We ARE there...Ogana Major has
					been destroyed...

							LUKE
					What!  What are you saying?

		Luke moves close and begins to search the viewing monitors.

							HAN
					What's left of it is contaminated.
					That's it there...look at those
					radiation read-outs!...and the
					blockade is gone.  Now what's going
					on?

		Luke sits down in a state of shock.  He stares blankly at
		the monitor read-outs.  Han is very angry at this turn of
		events.

							MONTROSS
					I don't care how large the Imperial
					fleet has become, it couldn't have
					done this.  Half the planet is torn
					away.  It would have taken a thousand
					ships with a lot more fire power than
					I've ever seen...very fascinating.

							HAN
					Well, I don't like it.  Where is
					your father?

							LUKE
					He must be dead...All this way and
					he's probably dead...

							HAN
					Who's going to pay us??

		The young pirate captain grabs Luke and holds him high
		against the cockpit wall.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					I'm beginning not to like you!

		Luke clears his throat and snaps out of his depression.

							LUKE
					Deak!  Deak would know...my brother.

							HAN
					What?

							LUKE
					My brother could help us.  He would
					know what to do.

							HAN
					Could he pay us?

							LUKE
					He might know what happened. He's
					...ah...in a bit of a fix.  I'm
					sure he would be most grateful if
					we helped him.

		Han puts the boy down and a scheme formulates in Luke's mind.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					If my father is dead, then every-
					thing is his...but it's no use. We
					could never get to him...it's im-
					possible.

							HAN
					Nothing's impossible.  Not for
					me anyway.  Tell me where he is
					and we'll go there.

							LUKE
					He's being held prisoner...You
					couldn't help him...No one could,
					not even a Jedi Bendu knight
					could...

							HAN
					I could.  Where is he?

							LUKE
					Alderaan.

		The word hits Han and Montross like a mad bantha; but Han
		recovers nicely, and thinks about it for a moment.

							MONTROSS
					Well, he's right, you can't go
					there.

							HAN
					Why not?  The fact that no one
					in their right mind would ever
					try might make it easy...You're
					sure your brother would make it
					worth our while?

							LUKE
					Beyond your wildest dreams...

							HAN
					You have no fear of Alderaan?

							LUKE
					As you said, the fact that no one
					would venture there voluntarily
					makes it easy.

							MONTROSS
					You boys have the space giddies...
					but calculating the probabilities,
					you may have something...

							HAN
					Chart a new course...

							LUKE
					Boy, will Deak be surprised to see
					us.

		Montross gives the two boys a doubtful glance.

	61.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

		Han, Chewbacca, Luke, and the robots sit around a large table
		in the lounge area of the starship.  Han and Luke are deep
		in thought.  Luke sits up.

							LUKE
					I thought starcaptains were
					supposed to be clever.  I
					thought you did this kind of
					thing all the time...

							HAN
					Well, I do, of course.  But
					Alderaan...even I've never
					been there.  When I said I'd
					take you...I thought you al-
					ready had a plan...

		Montross enters the lounge area and sits down.  He flexes
		his new left arm which was just replaced.

							MONTROSS
					This new arm is a lot stiffer
					than the last one.  They just
					don't make these things the way
					they used to...We've reached
					the first perimeter of Alderaan.
					What's the next move?

		Everyone is lost in deep and perplexing thoughts.  He is
		slightly amused at the young adventurer's dilemma.

							HAN
					I guess there is only one thing
					to do, and that is to fly right
					in there and take over...we can
					do it.

							MONTROSS
					Whoa there...May I make a sugges-
					tion to the captain?  There is only
					one way into Alderaan, and N0 way
					out.  It's an island city suspended
					in a sea of cirrus methane.  The
					dungeons have triple guards, scramble
					scanners, gas locks, and every sec-
					tor is isolated...and most important,
					it's the dwelling place of the Bogan
					Master: Prince Valorum.  This ven-
					ture of yours is sheer madness; but
					I have calculated the probabilities,
					and there might be a way.

							HAN
					How??

							MONTROSS
					It is a rather complex plan; but
					it has the greatest probability
					of working...Go to the library,
					get all the tapes on Imperial
					procedure...You will have to learn
					the...

							HAN
					We're going to get in by studying
					procedures??  I don't like it.

							MONTROSS
					All right then, we'll use your
					plan.

		Han slumps in his seat with a dejected look.

							HAN
					All right, get the tapes.

							MONTROSS
					...and we're going to need the
					space on all of our scan-shielded
					compartments and lockers.

							HAN
					What do you want with our scan-
					proof lockers?

	62. EXT. SPACE AROUND PLANET ALDERAAN

		The long ornate pirate starship approaches the gray gaseous
		planet of Alderaan.  The ship is not propelled, but simply
		drifts crab-like toward the planet.  As it approaches the
		surface, huge billowing clouds extend out like menacing
		tentacles.  The peacefulness of this nebulous idyll is
		broken by the increasing wail of ion engines.  Suddenly,
		four sleek space fighters from the Imperial third fleet
		burst from the huge cumulus range.  The craft are small
		cylindrical power shells dominated by two huge solar fins.
		They are flying in a tight formation; then two bank steeply
		and head toward the drifting starship.

	63.  INT. IMPERIAL FIGHTER - TRAVELING

		The Imperial fighters are four-man craft crammed with sophis-
		ticated electronic weaponry.

		The PILOT and GUNNERY OFFICER sit side by side, surrounded
		by lighted read-outs.  They wear the gleaming black uni-
		forms of the dungeon guards.

							PILOT
					No reply on any circuits...She
					appears to be drifting; but
					you'd better give her a blast
					anyway.

		Two laser bolts scream past the cockpit and explode in front
		of the drifting pirate ship.

							PILOT (CONT'D)
					Kuro one to AD four.  We have
					what appears to be a drifting
					TDFI04 which does not respond
					to warnings.  No life forms
					appear on the scanner...Escape
					pods four, seven, and Oh three
					have been jettisoned...Should
					we destroy her or attempt sal-
					vage?  She looks in good shape.
					...Right...Will do.

	64.  EXT. SPACE AROUND PLANET ALDERAAN

		The two tiny fighter craft orbit in front of the pirate star-
		ship as small plates shoot from their fins and attach them-
		selves to the larger craft.  Lines pull taut and the pirate
		starship is towed among the towering gray clouds by the two
		little Imperial space fighters.  The second two space fighters
		take up position behind the starship and follow it in.

	65.  INT. IMPERIAL FIGHTER - TRAVELING

		The pilot is cold and professional as his craft closes in
		on the starship.  The positions of the ships are displayed
		on a read-out.  The pilot gives the gunner a quick look be-
		fore he flips his sun shield over his eyes.

							PILOT
					It appears to be a Corellian
					Gypsy vessel, as close as I
					can make out...Still no life
					forms, no contamination.  Life
					systems still functioning...
					they simply abandoned her for
					some reason.  We'll bring her
					in through the main forward bay.
					Is that satisfactory?

							COM-LINK
					Security is standing by. Kuro
					one, you have clearance.

	66.  EXT. PLANET ALDERAAN - CLOUD SEA

		The towering white oxide clouds pass, revealing the Imperial
		city of Alderaan.  The magnificent domed and gleaming city
		is perched, mushroom-like, on a tall spire which disappears
		deep into the misty surface of the planet.  The little pro-
		cession of spaceships speeds toward the city.

	67.  INT. MAIN FORWARD BAY - SPACEPORT - IMPERIAL CITY OF ALDERAAN

		The pirate starship rests in a huge hangar bay which dwarfs
		the Corellian craft!  Hundreds of troops work their way
		toward the craft under the cover of reflective shields.  A
		battalion commander and two guards edge their way toward
		the main hatch.  One of the guards aims a long laser rifle
		at the hatch.  A commotion erupts behind the troops, and
		they turn to see two SITH KNIGHTS striding into the huge
		spaceport hangar.  The two Sith knights appear slightly
		amused at the cautious stormtroopers.  The battalion com-
		mander bows before the dark and fearsome Sith knights.

							FIRST KNIGHT
					Chief, get your men back.  Let us
					check this out.
						(to the other Sith)
					These MANTHAS troops are getting
					far too timid.

		The Sith knights boldly approach the ship and swing open
		the hatch.  They start to enter the ship when a loud clank-
		ing sound, somewhat like a wrench being dropped down an air
		shaft, startles them and they jump back.  The Sith warriors
		ignite their laser swords simultaneously, and take a defen-
		sive stance.  The hundred or so troopers duck behind their
		chrome shields and direct their laser weapons at the open
		hatch.  A few more sounds are heard from within the giant
		starship.  The tension becomes almost palpable.  The gang-
		ling, bronze Threepio pops his "Art Deco" head out of the
		hatchway.

							THREEPIO
					Hello!

		The two Sith knights give each other rather puzzled looks.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					I'm See Threepio, Human Cyborg
					relations.
					It appears my masters have de-
					parted, leaving me with their
					abandoned starship.  My only
					problem is that the operation
					of Astro-vehicles is not within
					my capacity...

		The first Sith knight turns back to the battalion commander.

							FIRST KNIGHT
					Chief, hold this thing for in-
					spection, and check out the
					rest of the ship.  I think you
					have picked up a piece of drift
					junk.  Salvage what you can,
					and atomize the rest.  Next time
					a little more bravery, commander.
					WAIT before you call us.

		The Sith knights leave the hangar as the troops shuffle on
		board the deserted vessel.  Threepio seems confused as
		troops rush around, completely ignoring him.

	68.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

		The troops search the ship with small hand scanners.  The
		commander and his aid enter the lounge.  They are approached
		by a slender, weasel-like OFFICER.

							OFFICER
					There are no other "droids", sir.
					The ship isn't much -- a rag-tag,
					custom-built job...Might be worth
					some study...

		A TROOPER approaches the group.

							TROOPER
					All clear, sir.  There is a row
					of supply lockers we couldn't
					get into.

							COMMANDER
					Let the scavenger crews take care
					of that.  Post a guard, and send
					the men back.  Keep the "droid"
					here with the ship; we'll let the
					scavenger crew take care of him,
					too.

		The troops begin to file out of the ship.

	69.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - HALLWAY

		A lone trooper runs through the hallway heading for the exit.
		In a few moments, all is quiet.  The muffled sounds of a
		distant officer giving orders finally fade.  A sharp tapping
		can be heard very near, and a panel on a row of low cabinets
		crashes to the floor.  Han Solo's head pokes out of the
		hole and looks around the hallway.  He then pulls himself
		out of his cramped quarters and struts around, stretching
		his legs.  A second locker breaks open and Luke emerges.
		Chewbacca pokes his furry head out of the first locker and
		Han tells him the way is clear.

							HAN
					This is ridiculous.  I tell you
					it's not going to work. Montross
					is crazed half the time...

		Luke straightens himself out as Montross appears in his
		locker.

	70.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

		Luke, Han, Montross, Chewbacca, and little Artoo quietly
		make their way down a hallway to the lounge area, where
		four Imperial troopers stand guard.  Luke peeks around the
		doorway, then whispers to Han.

							LUKE
					There are only four.  Remember:
					Quietly, and don't mess up the
					uniforms...

		Han repeats this to Chewbacca and they both grin with ex-
		cited, determined looks on their faces.  Luke gives the
		signal as the Wookiee and the young Corellian pirate charge
		past him with their laser swords held high, screaming like
		wild banshees.  Luke is somewhat confused by the attack.
		The yelling and the clash of swords echo throughout the
		ship.  Montross holds his ears.  Artoo runs and joins up
		with the shackled Threepio.

	71.  INT. MAIN BAY GANTRY - CONTROL TOWER

		In the main control tower, next to the starship, a gantry
		officer looks up from his desk, as if he hears something.
		He turns to an aide who is busy readjusting a monitor.

							GANTRY OFFICER
					Did you hear that?

		The aide shakes his head; but the officer, convinced that
		he heard something, leaves the control tower and heads for
		the pirate ship.

	72.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

		The gantry officer cautiously enters the pirate starship
		with his laser pistol drawn.  Everything is quiet in the
		lounge area.  Two guards sit at a table with a third stand-
		ing over them.  The fourth guard approaches the gantry
		officer.

							GUARD
					You have business here?

		The guard is Han Solo.  He struggles to hide a large blood
		stain under his right arm.

							OFFICER
					I thought I heard something down
					here.

							HAN
					Are you sure it was from down here?
					We didn't hear anything...

		The gantry officer shakes his head at the puzzlement.

							OFFICER
					Well, I guess not...but keep your
					eyes open...

		The guard standing at the table is Luke; and as he turns to
		glance at the gantry officer, one of the guards sitting at
		the table topples over and lands with his face on the floor.
		The gantry officer raises his pistol and immediately becomes
		suspicious.  An embarrassed grin breaks out on Luke and Han's
		faces.  With a swiftness rivaling a Jedi prince, Han knocks
		the gun from the gantry officer's hand and decks him.  Luke
		runs over to help Han, and Montross, Chewbacca and the robots
		rush in.

							LUKE
					Don't mess him up!

		Han starts to change jackets with the gantry officer.

							HAN
					I've just been promoted.

							MONTROSS
					All right now, you don't have
					much time.  I hope you can re-
					member everything.

							LUKE
					We'll be back before you know
					it.

							HAN
					Just have the ship ready.

		Luke binds the huge Chewbacca with electronic cuffs.  The
		Wookiee has a worried and slightly frightened look on his
		face.  Han reassures him, straightens his jacket and they
		start off into the giant Imperial city of Alderaan.  Han
		and Luke walk on either side of the giant Chewbacca and
		Artoo and Threepio reluctantly follow along behind.
		Montross stays aboard the starship and carefully and
		quietly closes the hatch.

	73.  INT. MAIN BAY GANTRY - CONTROL TOWER

		A lone aide is quietly working on a monitor when Chewbacca,
		the huge Wookiee, appears in the doorway with a bone-chilling
		howl.  A look of surprise, awe, and sheer dread crosses
		the aide's face as he stumbles over his tools.  The Wookiee
		flattens him with one blow.  Threepio and Artoo waddle into
		the room, followed by Han and Luke guarding the rear.

							LUKE
					Must he howl so?  Every Sith in
					the city will know we're here.

							HAN
					Good!  I prefer a straight fight
					to all this sneaking around.

		Threepio and Artoo look over the control panel, until Artoo
		finds something which gets him excited.

							THREEPIO
					We've found it, sir.  Bless the
					maker, this control board has one.

		Han and Luke rush over to the robots.  Chewbacca busies
		himself with hanging the control aide by his toes.

							LUKE
					Plug him in.Let's see what
					we get.

		Artoo punches his claw arm into a computer socket, and the
		vast Imperial brain network comes to life, feeding informa-
		tion to the little robot.  After a few moments, he beeps
		something to Threepio.

							THREEPIO
					Level five, Detention block A-23,
					cell 2187... He's still alive...
					but his condition is reported as
					critical.

							LUKE
					All right, wait for us here...
					Send feed-back into the control
					sensors in that Detention block
					only.

		Han puts the electronic bonds back on Chewbacca and the
		trio starts out the door.

							THREEPIO
					Pardon me for asking, sir...but,
					ah...what are we to do if someone
					should discover us here?

							HAN
					Hope they don't have blasters.

							THREEPIO
					That isn't very reassuring.

	74.  INT. DETENTION AREA - ELEVATOR TUBE - IMPERIAL CITY OF
		ALDERAAN

		Han and Luke try to look inconspicuous, as they wait for a
		vacuum elevator to arrive.  Troops and bureaucrats bustle
		about ignoring the trio completely; only a few give the
		giant Wookiee a curious glance.  Finally, a small elevator
		arrives, and the trio enter.  A bureaucrat races to get
		aboard also, but is signaled away by Han.  The door to the
		pod-like vehicle slides closed, and it takes off through a
		vacuum tube.

							LUKE
					This is the PT-27 unit that ceases
					operation if there is any kind of
					alarm.

		He rubs his hand across a series of small holes.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					Gas...Montross was definitely
					right.  If they discover us,
					we'll never get out.

		Han gives him a skeptical look.

	75.  INT. DETENTION AREA - DUNGEON

		The giant Wookiee and his two guards enter the old, gray
		security station.  Guards and laser gates are everywhere.
		Han whispers to Luke under his breath.

							HAN
					This isn't going to work.

							LUKE
					Why didn't you say so before.

							HAN
					I think I did.

		A tall, grim-looking officer approaches the trio.

							OFFICER
					What code is this?

							LUKE
					I've got it here somewhere...
					It's SPT 188544.  You can check
					it through the...ahh, oh yes,
					lex-321.

							OFFICER
					It will take a while -- the big
					mode is acting up...getting feed-
					back from somewhere.

		The officer goes back to his console and begins to punch in
		the information.  There are only three other troopers in
		the area.  Luke and Han survey the situation, checking all
		of the alarms, laser gates and camera eyes.  Han unfastens
		one of Chewbacca's electronic cuffs and shrugs to Luke.

							LUKE
					May THE FORCE OF OTHERS be with us.

		Suddenly, Chewbacca throws up his hands and lets out with
		one of his ear-piercing howls.  He grabs Han's laser sword
		and ignites it, pushing Han against the wall.

							HAN
					Look out!  He's loose!

		The startled guards are momentarily dumbfounded.  Luke and
		Han have already pulled out their laser pistols and are
		blasting away at the terrifying Wookiee.  Their barrage of
		laser fire misses Chewbacca, but hits the camera eyes, laser
		gate controls, and the Imperial guards.  The officer is the
		last to fall under the laser fire just as he starts to push
		the alarm system.  Luke rushes over to the com-link system,
		which is screeching questions about what is going on.  Han
		and Chewbacca disappear down one of the sub-hallways.

							LUKE
					A Wookiee broke loose up here,
					but we've got him under control.
					There is a lot of damage, four
					casualties.  The main door jammed.
					Better keep the rescue squad away
					from here, we've got some fires...

		He blasts some of the furniture with his laser pistol and it
		bursts into flames, creating a lot of smoke.

	76.  INT. DUNGEON - CELL ROW

		Han and Chewbacca race down the rows of low, stone-cell doors.
		Han stops before cell 2187 and yells something to Chewbacca,
		who covers his face as the young pirate blasts the door away
		with his laser pistol.  When the smoke clears, Han looks in
		the cell and an expression of horror crosses his face.

							HAN
					"Holy Maker" No!

		Suspended inside the cell by invisible rays, a bloody and
		mutilated Deak Starkiller hangs upside down.  A strange
		yellow glow radiates from his eyes.  Chewbacca rushes into
		the cell past the dazed Han.  The Wookiee yells something
		and Han comes to, firing his pistol at a small control box
		in the wall.  The unconscious Deak drops like a rock into
		the giant Wookiee's arms.  Chewbacca slings him over his
		shoulders, and joins Han in the hallway.

	77.  INT. DETENTION AREA - DUNGEON

		Smoke fills the small control center as Luke fiddles with
		the wires on the control board.

		A series of explosions at the main doorway knock a hole in
		the wall through which several Imperial troops begin to
		emerge.  Luke fires his laser pistol at them through the
		smoke and flames.  He turns and runs down a sub-hallway,
		stopping only for a moment on the far side of the passage-
		way to lock on the laser gate "cutters".  He takes a small
		com-link transmitter from his belt and speaks into it.

							LUKE
					C3PO - C3P0 -- switch off emer-
					gency communications network.
					We're on our way.  Monitor what
					you can...What was that, I didn't
					copy...

	78.  INT. MAIN BAY GANTRY - CONTROL T0WER

		Threepio paces the control center as little Artoo beeps and
		whistles a blue streak.  Threepio yells into the small com-
		link transmitter.

							THREEPIO
					I said, all systems have been
					alerted to your presence, sir.
					I respectfully suggest you re-
					turn at once...

		The transmitter squawks a short reply, and Threepio peeks
		out the tower window at the starship.  All is quiet.  He
		then moves to the door and it slides open a crack.  Several
		troops rush past, yelling and shouting orders.  Threepio
		slams the door shut, and pushes the lock lever.

							THREEPIO (CONT'D)
					Oh no!

	79.  INT. DUNGEON - CELL ROW

		Han and Chewbacca rush toward the detention control complex,
		but are met by Luke running toward them.

							LUKE
					There's no going back that way.

		Luke notices his mutilated brother draped over Chewbacca's
		shoulders.  His mouth drops open in stunned shock.

							HAN
					He's still with us, but there
					ain't much left of him.
					Your family must have something
					the Empire wants awfully bad.

		The trio turns and runs down the cell block passageway.
		They reach a small grate in the wall, covering a passage
		that leads down into a deep darkness.

							LUKE
					This way.  It might lead out of
					the cell block.

		Luke and Han pull up the rusty grate, and they disappear
		into the black passageway.

	80.  INT. DUNGEON - PASSAGEWAY

		Han leads the group down the ever-darkening, narrow passage-
		way.  Their footsteps echo on the cold stone steps of the
		winding, descending stairway.  Han and Luke switch on small
		lights in their gunbelts.  The rhythmic marching of storm-
		troops is heard behind them.  Han stops the group before
		an intersecting hallway.  The marching troops seem to be
		getting louder; muffled voices can be heard.

							LUKE
					They're right behind us.  Which
					way?

							HAN
					Your guess is as good as mine.
					Maybe we'd better keep going
					down until we reach the docking
					level...

		They continue down the eerie, slimy corridor that gets nar-
		rower and narrower as they descend into the bowels of the
		city.

	81.  INT. MAIN BAY GANTRY - CONTROL TOWER

		A loud buzzer sounds throughout the control tower.  Threepio
		rushes to the computer console.

							THREEPIO
					All right, all right, I'm going
					to answer it...just don't blame
					me if we get caught.

		He switches on the control com-link.

							COM-LINK
					There is a problem on the level
					five detention area.  Double
					alert.

							THREEPIO
					Confirmed, and out.
						(to Artoo)
					Do you think they'll believe that?

	82.  INT. DUNGEON - PASSAGEWAY

		The passageway has gotten so small that Han, Luke and
		Chewbacca must walk sideways.  Suddenly the way opens up to
		a wide, low ceiling corridor that is very dark and dank.

							HAN
					We made it...Hurry!

		The group runs along the foul-smelling passageway.

							LUKE
					I think they've stopped following
					us.

							HAN
					I wonder why?...It's sure getting
					hot down here.  Where do you think
					this leads?

							LUKE
					It's some kind of vent system.

		A loud, horrible, inhuman moan works its way up from the
		far end of the passageway and stops the group dead in its
		tracks.  They exchange rather worried looks.

							HAN
					I think I know why they stopped
					following us...

							LUKE
					Which direction is it?

		Chewbacca jabbers something to Han.

							HAN
					Chewbacca says there are legends
					of the Sith keeping DAI NOGAS in
					the belly of the city...Dai Nogas
					are not to be trifled with.

							LUKE
					Which way should we go?

							HAN
					They are not natural creatures.
					They are very large; but it
					could be anywhere.  There is no
					hope for us back there, so I
					guess we should push ahead.

		They start forward; but the giant Wookiee stops and howls
		something at Han.  The young captain talks to the frightened
		creature and eventually calms him down, and they slowly con-
		tinue forward.  Barely perceivable, a dim light glimmers at
		the far end of the hallway.

							LUKE
					Look, a light, head for it!

		The group picks up speed as it nears the light.  Suddenly,
		a huge form blocks out the light, and Chewbacca lets out a
		terrified howl and begins to back away.  Han and Luke stand
		fast with their laser pistols drawn.  Han calls back to the
		Wookiee, who begins to cower near one of the damp walls.

							HAN
					Guns are no good.  Only a Jedi,
					strong with the FORCE, can stop
					it.

		The huge shape, breathing loud and deep, sloshes forward.

							LUKE
					Maybe we could out-flank it?

							HAN
					The passageway is too small...We
					would have to distract it with
					something.

		The two boys begin to slowly walk backwards as the horrible
		DAI NOGA begins its cumbersome advance.

							LUKE
					Get Chewbacca, try to get around
					it.  I'll draw it away.

							HAN
					Are you sure??  These things
					aren't natural.

							LUKE
					I'll listen to your plan...

		Han turns and rushes back to Chewbacca, who is huddled
		against the wall, with the unconscious Deak lying by his
		side.  The Wookiee is shaking and wailing like a small
		child.  In the thin light provided by the small door at
		the end of the passageway, the faint outline of the grue-
		some Dai Noga can be perceived.  Luke, with shaking hands,
		fires directly at the center of the beast.  His laser bolt
		passes through the huge creature and explodes against a
		far wall.  The light from the blast reveals a little more
		of the thing, which is something like a cross between a
		huge spider and a giant squid.

		Han has blindfolded Chewbacca, and attempts to lead the
		Wookiee carrying Deak around the terrifying Dai Noga.
		They edge their way along the corridor wall as Luke fires
		a second blast at the slime.  The Dai Noga lets out with
		a horrible moan and lumbers towards Luke with a new vigor.
		Luke backs away firing as he goes.  Han and Chewbacca make
		it to the door and watch the Dai Noga move after Luke.

							HAN
					We're clear!  I'll distract him.

		He fires a shot at the monster, but it continues after Luke.

							LUKE
					Shoot above him!

		Han fires again, this time above the creature, knocking
		rocks and debris on top of him.  He turns to face his new
		enemy, enabling Luke to creep around the Dai Noga and join
		Han and Chewbacca.  The spider-like monster lets out a
		moan and leaps at the two youths.  Chewbacca has worked
		loose the iron grate covering the doorway, and the group
		tumbles into a dusty, unused hallway.

	83.  INT. DUNGEON - HALLWAY

		The Dai Noga bangs against the opening and a long slimy
		tentacle works its way out of the doorway searching for a
		victim.  Han aims his pistol.

							LUKE
					No, wait!!  They'll hear...

		Han fires at the doorway, creating an avalanche of rubble
		which buries the monster.

		The noise of the blast echoes relentlessly throughout the
		passageway.  Luke simply shakes his head at the young cap-
		tain.  They get up and start down the passageway.  Han is
		clearly bothered by Luke's low opinion of his actions.

							HAN
					I don't care, I want them to
					find us...I need a good fight...
					I could polish off a whole squad,
					like that!

		He snaps his fingers as Luke gives him a skeptical look.

	84.  INT. MAIN BAY GANTRY - CONTROL TOWER

		Threepio nervously paces the control room.

							THREEPIO
					You mean they've calculated that
					the escape has something to do
					with the ship!  Then they'll come
					up here, too...Oh me! We'll all
					be atomized.  Where could they
					have disappeared to?

	85.  INT. SPACEPORT - PASSAGEWAY

		Luke and Han stand before a bay window overlooking the pi-
		rate starship.  They watch as a platoon of Imperial storm-
		troopers take up guard positions outside the craft.  An
		officer attempts to open the hatch and enter the ship, but
		is unsuccessful.  He exits the docking bay in a hurry.

							LUKE
					He'll be heading for the control
					tower.  Come on...

		The two boys rush down the hallway, followed by the lumber-
		ing Chewbacca carrying Deak.  They round a corner and run
		smack dab into twelve Imperial stormtroopers heading toward
		them.  Both groups are taken by surprise, and stop in their
		tracks.  Before even thinking, Han draws his laser sword
		and charges the troops, yelling at the top of his lungs.
		The troops are startled by this assault and start to back
		off.  Han manages to cut several down before the rest flee
		in panic.  Pleased with his prowess, Han starts after them,
		yelling back to Luke as he goes.

							HAN
					Get Chewbacca to the ship!

							LUKE
					Wait, where are you going?  Come
					back here!

		Han has already rounded a corner and does not hear.  Luke
		rushes Chewbacca to the doorway at the end of the hallway.
		He motions the Wookiee to go on.

	86.  INT. SPACEPORT - SUB-HALLWAY

		Han chases the ten stormtroopers down a long sub-hallway.
		He is yelling and brandishing his laser sword.  The troops
		reach a dead end and are forced to turn and fight.  Han
		stops a few feet from them and assumes a defensive position.
		He is ready to cut them down.  The troops begin to ignite
		their laser swords; soon all ten troopers are moving into
		an attack position in front of the lone star pirate. Han's
		determined look begins to fade as the troops begin to ad-
		vance.

		Luke runs down the sub-hallway in a last-ditch attempt to
		save his bold friend.  Suddenly he hears the clamor of
		laser swords and yelling.  Around the corner shoots Han
		Solo, pirate extraordinaire, running for his life, followed
		by a host of furious stormtroopers.  Luke turns and starts
		running the other way, also.  They run around several cor-
		ners, and the troops drop a ways behind.  Luke squeezes
		down a side passage and signals for Han to follow.

	87.  INT. SPACEPORT - NARROW PASSAGE

		Luke and Han run down the narrow passageway looking for an
		exit.  The stormtroopers can be heard barking orders as
		they follow the duo.  An officer at the far end of the hall-
		way spots them and fires a laser blast at them, but misses.
		They reach a complex blast-shield door which they attempt
		to open by pushing a series of buttons on a lock switch.
		The several layers of hatches and locks slowly peel away.
		Han returns the laser fire of the gathered stormtroopers
		at the end of the hallway.  The signal on their belt com-
		links begins to buzz.  Luke takes one in hand and gets a
		jumble of excited Wookiee gibberish.  He hands the small
		com-link receiver to Han, who continues his barrage of the
		troopers.

							LUKE
					It's for you.

		Han talks to the Wookiee and seems to be in some kind of
		an argument.

	88.  INT. SPACEPORT - MAIN FORWARD BAY

		Chewbacca is crouched behind some supply cannisters near
		the main entrance to the spaceport bay.  Stormtroopers
		march to and fro in front of the pirate starship.  The
		giant Wookiee whispers into the com-link.  Deak lies in a
		heap at his feet.  Chewbacca ducks lower as several troops
		stop almost on top of him.  He puts the com-link back on
		his belt and draws Deak close to him.

	89.  INT. SPACEPORT - NARROW PASSAGE

		Han gives the com-link back to Luke.

							HAN
					Chewbacca can't make it to the
					ship without help.

		The final hatch starts to swing open behind them.

							LUKE
					Then let's go!

		They turn and start into the main spaceport causeway.  A
		few feet into the hallway and the boys stop short.  Two
		evil, BLACK KNIGHTS OF THE SITH stride toward them.  Luke
		turns and runs back into the narrow passageway.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					Come on back.  We'll not be
					stopping them...

		Han jumps back into the narrow passageway and Luke pulls
		the main blast-shield lock switch.  The five layers of
		door instantly slam shut.

							HAN
					Now what??

		Luke shrugs his shoulders.  The stormtroopers renew their
		assault.

	90.  INT. SPACEPORT - MAIN CAUSEWAY

		The two Sith knights stop before the huge blast-shield door.
		Stormtroopers take up position behind them.  One of the
		knights turns to the first officer of the guard.

							SITH KNIGHT
					Move your man back.

		The troops scurry out of the way, as the Sith knights raise
		their arms over their heads, creating a powerful force field.

	91.  INT. SPACEPORT - NARROW PASSAGE

		The mighty blast-shield door bulges under the pressure of
		the Sith para-force.  Luke spots a small waste receptacle
		on the wall.  He fires a few shots at the assembled storm-
		troopers at the far end of the corridor, and moves to the
		garbage chute.  He motions for Han to follow, but the young
		starcaptain is sitting in a corner staring blankly at the
		bulging door.  Luke runs back to him.

							LUKE
					What is it?

							HAN
					It's no use...we're lost.

							LUKE
					No, no, there's a debris chute.
					It's the Bogan force making you
					feel that way.  Don't give up
					hope...fight it!

							HAN
					It's no use, it's no use.

		The giant hinge bolts on the blast-shield door begin to pop
		as the force of the Sith knights grows stronger.  Luke fires
		off a rapid series of shots and half-drags Han to the small
		grate in the wall.

							LUKE
					Well, we're going anyway.  Think
					of good things.  Drive the Bogan
					from your mind.

		Luke blasts the cover off the debris receptacle and shoves
		Han into the small opening.  The giant blast door begins
		to smolder, creating a smoky cover for the boys to hide in.
		Luke frantically blasts away at the advancing stormtroopers,
		then climbs into the garbage chute and disappears.

	92.  INTERIOR SPACEPORT - GARBAGE ROOM

		Luke slides through a series of chutes until he winds up
		in a large room full of muck.  Han is already stumbling
		around looking for an exit.  He finds a small hatchway and
		struggles to get it open.

							HAN
					The blasted thing is vacuum-
					sealed.

		He draws his laser pistol and fires at the hatch.  The laser
		bolt ricochets wildly around the small metal room.  Both
		Luke and Han dive for cover in the garbage as the bolt ex-
		plodes almost on top of them.  Luke climbs out of the gar-
		bage with a rather grim look on his face.

							LUKE
					I'm glad to see the Bogan is no
					longer with you, but would you
					put that thing away or you're
					going to get us both killed.

							HAN
						(sarcastic)
					I'll leave it for you to open
					then.  I'm just afraid we're
					going to have company soon...
					This is a brilliant escape.

							LUKE
					Well, it could be worse...

		Before Han can reply, the walls of the garbage receptacle
		begin to rumble and edge toward the adventurers.

							HAN
					Now what?!?

							LUKE
					Try to jam it with something.

		They place poles and long metal beams between the closing
		walls; but they are simply snapped and bent and the giant
		trash masher rumbles on.  The situation doesn't look good.

							HAN
					This isn't working!

							LUKE
					Well then, think of something
					else!

		The room gets smaller and smaller, until it is only three
		feet wide.  Garbage is snapping and popping as it is crushed
		by the relentless walls.  Luke's com-link begins to buzz,
		and he pulls it off his belt.

							THREEPIO
					I begging your pardon, sir,
					but we are going to be unable
					to stay here much longer.
					Could you give us...

							LUKE
						(to Han)
					Threepio!  That's it.  The R-2
					unit is still plugged into the
					control systems...
						(into the
						com-link)
					Threepio, listen to me.  Have
					Artoo shut down all garbage
					chutes in the immediate con-
					necting bays.  I think we're
					on your level, but shut them
					off on the level above you,
					also...Quickly, shut them off!

		The rumbling walls begin to shake the room, and then they
		halt.  Han breathes a sigh of relief.  Luke goes over to
		the pressure hatch and scrapes some muck off a number.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					Open the pressure maintenance
					hatch on unit 366117891...

		In a moment, the door pops open.

							LUKE  (CONT'D)
					We're out.  Disconnect Artoo and
					go back to the ship...Avoid the
					troops, if possible...

							THREEPIO
					I wish you were here, sir.

							LUKE
					We'll be with you shortly.  In-
					struct Montross to get the ship
					started.

	93.  INT. SPACEPORT - GANTRY HALLWAY

		Two Imperial officers stand in the hallway leading to the
		spaceport.  One of the officers is a fleet admiral.  They
		spot Artoo and Threepio waddling towards them and can hardly
		believe their eyes.

							OFFICER
					That's them!

		Before they can do anything about it, Han and Luke jump
		the officers from behind, and put laser swords to their
		necks.  The robots trundle up to them.

							THREEPIO
					Thank goodness you're safe,
					sir.  Did you find Master Deak?

							LUKE
					Chewbacca's got him.  Now if we
					can just get by those guards be-
					fore the Sith arrive...

							THREEPIO
					They won't be here too quickly,
					I don't think; we shut and sealed
					all alarm doors in the gantry.

							HAN
						(to the officer)
					Come on, boys!

	94.  INT. SPACEPORT - MAIN FORWARD BAY

		Han and Luke, dragging their hostages in front of them,
		enter the starship bay.  Artoo and Threepio hurry in be-
		hind them.  The twenty or so troops guarding the starship
		train their weapons on the group, but seeing an admiral
		held as hostage, hesitate.  Chewbacca jumps out from be-
		hind the supply cannisters, carrying Deak over his shoulder,
		and joins the group.  They slowly make their way toward
		the starship, which is a medley of noises, as it prepares
		for take-off.  The main hatch slides open.

							OFFICER
					Forget about us -- fire on them.

		The troops aim their laser rifles.  The admiral panics.

							ADMIRAL
					No, wait!  Don't shoot!  They'll
					not get away.  They'll not get
					away.  Don't shoot!

		The group enters the starship and the hatch slams shut.

	95.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT

		Han slides into the co-pilot seat.  Montross gives him a
		big smile.

							HAN
					Get us out of here!

		Montross pulls back on the controls and the ship begins to
		move.  The dull thud of laser bolts can be heard bouncing
		off the outside of the ship.

							MONTROSS
					They aren't going to hurt us
					with those peashooters...

							HAN
					There are Sith out there.

	96.  EXT. IMPERIAL CITY OF ALDERAAN - MAIN STARSHIP BAY

		The starship lifts away from the starship bay and moves into
		the cloud sea of Alderaan.  Troops continue to fire at the
		ship as it leaves.  Too late, four Sith knights arrive.

							SITH KNIGHT
					They'll not get far.

	97.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING

		Han picks up the com-link.

							HAN
					Luke, jettison the hostages and
					get to one of the gun ports.

							MONTROSS
					You'd better get back there, too.
					Four TIE ships coming in at six
					o'clock.

		He points out the cockpit window to four small Imperial
		fighters banking in on their right side.

							HAN
					Was this trip really necessary?

							MONTROSS
					There's another bunch at two o'clock.
					We're into our power reserves, so
					take your time.  Sing out if they
					get below us and I'll kick her around
					...Now get going!

	98.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - GUN PORTS - AFT SECTION - TRAVELING

		Luke is busy checking out one of the two main laser cannons
		mounted in large rotating bubble turrets.  He adjusts his
		head-phones, and searches his electronic tracking screen
		for the Imperial fighters.

							MONTROSS (over head-phones) Here
					they come.

		Han jumps into the turret opposite Luke, and begins to strap
		himself in.  The pirate starship shudders as the Imperial
		fighters open fire.  Luke's turret swings around and he be-
		gins to return the fire.  Moments later, Han lowers his
		glare reflector and with a burst of smoke and electrical
		charge also opens up on the enemy craft.  One of the Imperial
		fighters is hit by a concentrated barrage and begins spin-
		ning out of control, until it finally explodes.  Han gives
		Luke a victory wave, which Luke gleefully returns.

		Imperial fighters buzz about everywhere.  The constant flash-
		ing of deflected laser bolts reflect in the interior of the
		turret bubble.  Chewbacca sits in an aft turret, blazing
		away at the enemy craft.  A huge explosion rocks the pirate
		ship and throws Artoo and Threepio crashing against a pas-
		sageway wall.

							THREEPIO
					Here we go again.  How did we
					get ourselves into this?  We
					never seem to be in the right
					place.

		Over the com-link, Montross gives instructions as to the
		enemy formations.  Several more Imperial ships explode and
		disappear from view.  The pirate starship undergoes a great
		deal of punishment as the battle rages.

							HAN
						(into the com-link)
					We're beginning to come apart
					back here...the ship will not
					take much more of this...

		Several of the Imperial fighters concentrate their fire on
		a weakened port antenna and finally it explodes, opening
		a hole in one of the compartments and everything that isn't
		bolted down is sucked into outer space.  Threepio and Artoo
		struggle to push a large cabinet in front of the hole.

	99.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING

		The cockpit is alive with warning lights and buzzers, but
		Montross manages to keep things under control.  He speaks
		into the com-link.

							MONTROSS
					You're doing great, boys. There
					are only three or four of them
					left; but maybe it's time we
					showed them this isn't your regu-
					lation type F-888 cargo-trawler.
					Stand by for hyper-skip...and
					hope she holds together.

		Montross pulls back on several of the levers before him,
		and the ship surges away from the tiny fighters.  The pi-
		rate starship races through the galaxy at an incredible
		speed; but it isn't long before the Imperial fighters catch
		up.

							MONTROSS (CONT'D)
					Take them now, boys.  They
					shouldn't be maneuverable at
					this speed.

	100. INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - GUN PORTS - AFT SECTION - TRAVELING

		Luke, Han and Chewbacca fire away at the now stationary
		Imperial craft.  One explodes, then another, and before
		long, they are all congratulating each other on their vic-
		tory.

											DISSOLVE TO:

	101. INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - SLEEP AREA

		Luke kneels over what's left of his brother.  Han stands
		in the doorway watching as Threepio applies some medication
		to the Jedi's gaping wounds.

							THREEPIO
					I don't know much more we can do
					for him, sir.  These are spiritual
					wounds.  The Bogan arts often run
					contrary to the ways of science...
					and logic.  I can't help him. Only
					a Jedi can save him.

							LUKE
					He's been trying to talk...He knows
					I'm here.  He knows it's me.

			Han simply shakes his head at the situation.

							HAN
					He must have something of great
					value for them to do that to him.
					A lost spice mine, maybe?  Well,
					whatever it is, he'd better re-
					gain consciousness 'cause I'm due
					my share...and I'm going to be
					very unhappy if he joins THE
					FORCE OF OTHERS before I get it...

			Han turns and leaves Luke and Threepio alone with Deak.

							LUKE
					You've done well, Threepio...you
					have served both of us well beyond
					your programming.  Leave me with
					him for awhile, would you?

							THREEPIO
					Thank you, sir.  Your kindness is
					greatly appreciated.  That is, the
					compliment of compliments...But
					sir, you too ought to be getting
					some rest...What with that tempest
					we stirred up back there, I'm sure
					we aren't through this yet.

							LUKE
					I'll be along shortly.

			Threepio turns and leaves, locking the cabin door behind
			him.

							LUKE (CONT'D)
					I guess you couldn't have known,
					but Ogana Major is gone, destroyed
					by something -- I can't imagine
					what...I don t know about father --
					whether he's dead or alive -- or
					where to find him if he is alive.
					I didn't know what to do, so I
					came for you...You can't die, you
					just can't...What am I going to do?
					Just tell me what to do...Oh, Deak!

			Luke slumps over his brother and begins to weep quietly.
			Suddenly he remembers the Kiber Crystal hidden in his belt.

			He takes off his belt and fumbles to open the secret com-
			partment.  The buckle snaps open and a powerful clear light
			fills the darkened room.  The Kiber Crystal's glow is al-
			most blinding.  Luke takes the supernatural gem and places
			it in his injured brother's hand.  Luke suddenly sits bolt
			upright.  A thought seems to come to him and he dashes
			out of the cabin.

	102.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

			Luke bursts into the lounge area where Chewbacca and Han
			are sprawled across the chairs, sound asleep.  They wake
			with a start.  Chewbacca draws his laser sword.

							LUKE
					Yavin's fourth moon.

							HAN
					What's wrong?

							LUKE
					My father's on the fourth moon
					of Yavin.  We must go there
					immediately.

							HAN
					Wait a minute.Is your brother
					conscious?

							LUKE
					No...

							HAN
					Then how do you know your father
					is on Yavin?  I've had it with
					your adventures...

			Chewbacca blurts out a long line of gibberish to Han.

							HAN (CONT'D)
					Yeah, you're going to get us all
					killed!

							LUKE
					My father is on the fourth moon of
					Yavin.  Your only reward is there,
					also.

			Han thinks about this for a few moments, then throws up
			his hands.

							HAN
					Well, we're already headed that
					way anyway.

											DISSOLVE TO:

	103.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT

			Montross is upset and starts yelling at Han and Luke.

							MONTROSS
					...It's a wasteland.  That system
					is way beyond the rim of the galaxy.

							LUKE
					But we HAVE enough power to get
					there.

			Luke slams a connector panel on the computer console.

							HAN
					Just relax for a second!

							MONTROSS
						(getting more
						excited)
					We have MORE than enough power to
					get there...But we don't have
					enough to get back, and there is
					no place to get power out there...
					We'd never get back.  It's madness...

			Montross starts to bring his arm down across the computer
			console to make his point, but Han grabs it in time to
			keep it from being dashed to bits.

							LUKE
					It's not a wasteland.  There is
					an outpost, I tell you...

			A sing-song alarm goes off on the scanner console.  Threepio,
			who has been quietly sitting in the co-pilot's seat all
			through the argument, interrupts his master.

							THREEPIO
					Excuse me, sir -- but we seem
					to be approaching another ship
					of some king.

			Montross looks into the scanner display.

							MONTROSS
					I don't think that's a ship,
					although it moves like one...
					it's much too large.  It's as
					big as a small moon.

							HAN
					A station of some kind?

							MONTROSS
					I don't know.  It's moving, but
					not very fast, and it's traveling
					in the same direction we are.

							HAN
					Move off, let's go around it. We
					don't need any more trouble.

							MONTROSS
					I'd sure like to see what it is...

							HAN
					Well, whatever it is, it means
					there must be some kind of a
					power depot out here, so we'll
					continue...

											DISSOLVE TO:

	104.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN

			The sleek pirate starship drifts into orbit around the
			emerald green, fourth moon of YAVIN.

	105.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING

			Montross and Han are at the controls, as Luke rushes into
			the cockpit.

							MONTROSS
					We pick up no significant life
					form concentrations down there.
					Certainly there's no outpost...

							LUKE
					It could be shielded, could be
					anything.

							HAN
					Could be nothing.

							LUKE
					Move into latitude sixty-one...

			A light begins to flash on the computer board.

							HAN
					What's that?

							MONTROSS
					A signal beacon.  Something is
					sending us coordinates...

							LUKE
					That's it!  Lock onto it!  We
					made it...We made it!

							MONTROSS
					There'll be no landing a ship
					this size on that terrain. We'll
					have to use the auxiliary units.

							LUKE
					Good.  I'll help Chewbacca with
					Deak.

			Luke rushes out of the cockpit.

							MONTROSS
					That moon or station -- or what-
					ever it is -- is back on the
					scope.  It's either following us
					here or was already coming here
					on its own.  I'd better stay with
					the ship.

							HAN
					Yeah, I think you'd better.  I
					don't like this.  Track us if
					you can...

	106.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN

			Two small lifepods jettison away from the starship, and
			slowly drift toward the awesome, deep green surface of
			the moon.  Retro-rockets automatically kick in and slow
			the pods.  The two tiny craft break through some light
			cloud cover and land in the dense, steaming jungles of
			Yavin's fourth moon.

	107.  EXT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - VINE JUNGLE

			One of the lifepods has come to rest in the middle of a bog.

			Han, Chewbacca, and Threepio emerge from the battered cap-
			sule as it slowly sinks into the murky swamp.

							HAN
					Montross was sure right about
					this not being a fit place to
					land.  We could have gotten
					KILLED coming through those
					trees...Well, let's find Luke...

							THREEPIO
					They landed further south, I
					think.  This is dangerous country.
					If you don't mind my saying so,
					I think we had better stay to-
					gether.

			Chewbacca inspects a huge laser weapon and straps several
			power packs to his bandoliers.  The group ventures into a
			forest of gargantuan trees shrouded in an eerie mist. The
			air is heavy with the fantastic cries of unimaginable
			creatures.

	108.  EXT. VINE JUNGLE

			Luke's lifepod is caught in the limbs of a huge tree.  The
			fragile craft has been ripped in half by the crash land-
			ing.  A glass-enclosed mummy case containing the wounded
			Deak Starkiller is securely strapped in what remains of
			the tiny lifepod.  But his unconscious brother, Luke, hangs
			half out of the damaged craft.  A two-foot high insect-
			like creature scoots down a branch and onto the back of
			the dormant warrior.  The insect lets out a chilling his-
			sing sound, and a slimy tube emerges from its hairy mouth,
			waking Luke.  He opens his eyes, but doesn't move.  He is
			immediately aware of the insect.  Suddenly, with one quick
			blow, he knocks the creature against the side of the life-
			pod, and it is squashed lifeless.

			Luke is a little groggy, but he manages to climb out of the
			wreckage.  He hears a frantic whistle, pathetic in its
			desperation.  Luke looks around and spots Artoo hanging up-
			side down, one of his three feet caught in a vine.  Luke
			lifts the stubby robot out of his predicament and places
			him securely on a wide limb.  Luke then attaches a thin
			cable from his utility belt to the tree trunk, and slides
			to the ground.  Han and Threepio are waiting for him at
			the base of the huge tree.

							HAN
					Are you all right?

							LUKE
					Yeah, I think so.  I'm going
					to need some help getting Deak
					down from there.

			Chewbacca emerges from the dense foliage and tells Han
			something.  He tells Chewbacca to climb the tree and get
			Deak.

							HAN
					He says we're about a league off
					the coordinates.  The going will
					be slow in this mess...

							LUKE
					Then we best get on with it.

	109.  EXT. VINE JUNGLE RIDGE

			Gruesome and unnatural sounds permeate this ghostly waste-
			land.  The jungle is a strange and eerie, fog-laden purga-
			tory.  The group stops on a ridge overlooking the rebel
			outpost of MASASSI.  All that can be seen of the fortress
			is a lone guard standing on a small pedestal jutting out
			above the dense jungle.  Suddenly, three Aquillian rangers
			break out of the dark foliage and approach the group. Han
			and Chewbacca raise their weapons.

							HAN
					Hold!  Who are you?  Whom do
					you serve?

			One of the rangers strides forward, ignoring Han's laser
			pistol.  He is a tall man; on his helmet is the crest of
			AQUILLAE.  He advances until he is standing a few feet
			from Luke's weapon.

							ANTILLES
					I am Bail Antilles...I serve
					THE FORCE OF OTHERS...We are
					agents of the Starkiller...He
					has been expecting you...

			Han looks a little puzzled, but lowers his weapon and tells
			Chewbacca to do likewise.  About two dozen rangers emerge
			from the brush and take up positions around the group. One
			of them speaks to Chewbacca in his own tongue, and the
			giant Wookiee lowers Deak onto a stretcher they have placed
			before him.

							ANTILLES (CONT'D)
					Which of you is young Luke?

							LUKE
					I am.  This is my friend and a
					great starcaptain, Han Solo...
					His first mate is called Chewbacca.

			Antilles bows low before Luke.  The young adventurer is
			embarrassed and doesn't know how to respond.  Finally the
			ranger rises.

							ANTILLES
					We must move swiftly, my lord.
					For you have arrived with all of
					the force of the Bogan at your
					heels.  The Death Star has found
					us once again, and a deadly battle
					lies before us.  There is little
					time.  Hurry!

	110.  EXT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - MASASSI OUTPOST

			Luke, Han, Chewbacca, the robots and Aquillian rangers ride
			on top of a low, gray armored transport speeder.  They swing
			past a long line of gleaming spacefighters sitting along
			the edge or the vast jungle runway.  The several different
			types of two-man fighter craft have a wide variety of mark-
			ings.  Several of the ships have bizarre and colorful de-
			signs painted across their large deflector fins, which trans-
			forms the crafts into huge and grotesque creatures, while
			others create beautiful and unique mosaic patterns.  Ground
			crews rush about servicing the craft.  Activity is at a
			fever pitch as Luke, Han and Antilles disembark the speeder
			and enter a low metal building to one side of the runway.

	111.  INT. MASASSI OUTPOST - WAR ROOM

			The war room is a mass of glass enclosures, electronic wall
			displays, monitors and computer stations.  Officers and
			aides rush to and fro, ignoring Luke and Han as they follow
			Major Antilles to a large, dimly lit conference room domi-
			nated by a huge galactic display board.  A briefing is in
			progress.  Several dozen officers sit around a long table
			as a young astro-general named DODANA is describing an
			attack plan to the others.  Antilles stops Han just outside
			the door as two braided guards approach them.

							ANTILLES
					You'll have to wait here.

			Han gives Luke a look of betrayal and anger.

							LUKE
					I'll be back, and you'll be
					paid.

			Luke follows Antilles into the conference room and a glass
			door slides silently closed behind them.

	112.  INT. MASASSI OUTPOST - CONFERENCE ROOM

			Antilles and Luke sit in chairs at the back of the room.
			Several officers at the table glance at Luke, but for the
			most part their attention remains riveted on General Dodana.

							DODANA
					...and although the digital
					analysis doesn't confirm it,
					he feels there is a weak point...

			Several large projections of a huge, armored space station
			appear behind Dodana.  One angle shows the north pole of
			the complex globe.  Six black towers dominate the detailed
			portion of the sphere.  Antilles whispers something to
			Luke who answers with a question.  Antilles points to a
			dark corner of the room near Dodana.  Luke strains to see
			something in the corner.  His hand fingers his belt buckle
			and he turns to Antilles and nods yes.

							DODANA (CONT'D)
					...Here, near the north pole
					someplace.  In an area somewhere
					below their generating towers,
					he predicts you'll find a small
					thermal exhaust port.  It is an
					unshielded shaft that runs di-
					rectly into the reactor system.
					A direct hit straight into the
					shaft would set up a chain reac-
					tion that would destroy the Death
					Star.

			A large, sallow-eyed General named AAY ZAVOR fiddles ner-
			vously with a small hand computer.

							ZAVOR
					The greatest concentration of
					fire power is at the poles.  I
					doubt a ship could get in there
					to find the exhaust port, let
					alone fire a direct hit down the
					shaft...

			A flight officer with a patch over one eye rises.

							FLIGHT OFFICER
					There is an impossible magnetic
					field around those towers. Maneu-
					verability in that sector is less
					than point three...

			The GRANDE MOUFF TARKIN, a thin, bird-like commander of
			the outland Kesselian Dragoons, stands, and Dodana sits
			down, revealing behind and to one side of him a wizened
			old man with long silver hair -- THE STARKILLER.  He is
			apparently asleep; but as the Grande Mouff rises, the
			Starkiller's crystal-clear eyes open knowingly.  An aura
			of power radiates from the ancient Jedi that almost knocks
			Tarkin over.  The Starkiller is a large man, but shriveled
			and bent by an incalculable number of years.  His face,
			cracked and weathered by exotic climates, is set off by a
			long silver beard and penetrating gray-blue eyes.  Luke
			stares at him in awe.  He's at once proud, moved and
			slightly frightened.

							TARKIN
					With all due respect, sir, the time
					has come for it to be said...

			There is a long pause, as most of the officers on the Grande
			Mouff's side of the table look down at their fidgeting hands
			or nervously look away.

							TARKIN (CONT'D)
					After our crushing defeat, and the
					destruction of Ogana Major by this
					Death Star...the Council has voted
					to trust the cybormitic analysis
					for future attack and planning pro-
					cedures.  Your contact with THE FORCE
					OF OTHERS is weak to the point where
					it can no longer be trusted.  This
					new attack formula is contrary to
					the cyborg plan and depends too much
					on faith...a faith that deserted us
					at Ogana Major.  Our blind, unwaver-
					ing faith in you and the Ashla has
					led to our doom...

			The Starkiller sits unmoved, unresponding.  Zavor jumps to
			his feet in great anger and despair.

							ZAVOR
					Your strategy destroyed us on
					Ogana Major!  THE FORCE OF OTHERS
					is no longer with us.  The Bogan
					is too strong. This Death Star
					is too strong!

			Finally Antilles can stand it no longer.

							ANTILLES
					The Bogan is already beginning
					to work on you...Will you flee
					like frightened children again,
					only to be hunted down again,
					until there is no place to hide.

							ZAVOR
					We were overwhelmed; his plan was
					hopeless as this new plan of his
					is hopeless...

							ANTILLES
					You would trust a machine's logic
					over THE FORCE OF OTHERS?  His son
					brings us new faith...

							TARKIN
					His son brought us the Death Star...
					He has betrayed us!

							ANTILLES
					He's brought us the Kiber Crystal!

			The room falls silent.  The bent and broken Starkiller rises
			and Tarkin and Zavor immediately sit down.  He motions for
			Luke to join him at the head of the table.  Luke hurries
			to his father's side and hands him the Kiber Crystal. The
			Starkiller holds up the powerful stone and it radiates a
			brilliant light throughout the room.  Years seem to drop
			from the old man as the Kiber's force moves into his body.

							THE STARKILLER
					With the Crystal, I can hold off
					the force of the Bogan...but when
					its presence is revealed, the enemy
					will stop at nothing to acquire it.
					...You will have to win the battle
					or lose everything...there will be
					no retreat, no place to hide if the
					Sith gain possession of the Crystal
					...finding the exhaust port is your
					only chance.
					You must have faith...THE FORCE
					OF OTHERS is with you.

			One of the younger officers stands up.

							OFFICER
					We'll find the port.

			Several other officers stand, also.

							SECOND OFFICER
					I think my boys could get in
					there -- they can hit it.

			More officers and Generals join in until even Zavor and
			Tarkin are standing.

							TARKIN
					It will be to the finish, then.
					This time, victory!

	113.  INT. MASASSI OUTPOST - LIBRARY

			Luke is embraced by his father in the cool, dim quiet of
			the outpost electronic library.

							THE STARKILLER
					You've done well, my son -- but
					I'm afraid your trial has just
					begun.  I had hoped we would
					have more time, time enough for
					you to learn the ways of the
					Force.  But you'll have to face
					the enemy as a warrior rather
					than a Jedi.  When the Death Star
					is destroyed, there will be time
					enough for training.

			Artoo and Threepio enter the room and bow low before their
			master and his father.

							THE STARKILLER (CONT'D)
					I trust your replacement parts
					are satisfactory?

							THREEPIO
					Most certainly, and your kindness
					is greatly appreciated.
					I feel my capacities have doubled,
					and if I do say so, Artoo is a
					new unit.  I'd hardly know him.

							THE STARKILLER
					You have served us well, and I
					am releasing you from further
					service.  You may rest and enjoy
					your remaining years in tran-
					quillity...

							THREEPIO
					If it's at all possible, sir, and
					if it's all the same to you...no
					disrespect intended...we'd rather
					continue to serve Master Luke.

							THE STARKILLER
					The choice is yours.  Luke is truly
					fortunate.  Now go and have them
					bring us this starcaptain who was
					so helpful to you.

							THREEPIO
					I begging your pardon, sir, but
					might I inquire after Master Deak?

							THE STARKILLER
					Deak is doing fine, but the Bogan
					is still heavy with him and it will
					be some time before he is himself
					again.  Now be off with you.

			They bow low and leave the room.  Antilles ushers Han into
			the office.  Antilles bows low before the Starkiller and
			his son.  Han feels quite awkward standing before the
			legendary galactic hero.  He gives the old man a short
			bow, then gives Luke a slight nod.

							THE STARKlLLER (CONT'D)
					You have been of great service to
					us.  We offer you this in gratitude.
					Luke tells me you have a great de-
					sire for such things.

			He hands the young starcaptain a small box containing many
			neatly minted chrome bars.  Han's mouth drops open in amaze-
			ment.

							HAN
					This must be at least seven or
					eight million!

							THE STARKILLER
					I would that I could give you
					more.  We sorely need a man of
					your ability.

							HAN
					I'm afraid my calling is elsewhere.
					Sorry, Luke, but I'm not a part of
					this.

			Luke bows his head and is clearly disappointed.  He steps
			forward and gives Han a gray gunbelt with a chrome laser
			sword attached.

							LUKE
					Han, I want you to take this.
					It was fashioned by the Bomerwrights
					of Sullest.  It is a special blade
					with great power that will never
					fail you.  Take care, my friend.

		He gives Han a hug, and the young starcaptain leaves.

							THE STARKILLER
					Now, my son, tell me of Owen, Beru,
					and the twins, and of course, little
					Leia.

	114.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN

			A small silver rebel ship edges close to the pirate star-
			ship, until the two craft link up.

	115.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - LOUNGE AREA

			Han and Chewbacca enter the starship and are greeted by
			Montross.  Han gives him the box of chrome bars.

							HAN
					Eight million!  Eight million
					and we got it legal.  Can you
					beat that?  If only Captain Oxus
					could see us now.  He never had
					a haul this big!

							MONTROSS
					You didn't stay long.  Could you
					have tried for more?

							HAN
					That station we spotted is what
					destroyed Ogana Major. They're
					going to try to stop it.

							MONTROSS
					Then I'd better get us going.

							HAN
					Yeah, do that.

			Han has a wistful look in his eyes as Montross heads back
			to the cockpit.

	116.  INT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - MASASSI OUTPOST - READY ROOM

			Chaos.  Red scramble lights are flashing.  Alert horns and
			attack buzzers create an unbelievable cacophony.  Star-
			pilots in a variety of different style spacesuits scramble
			out of the low concrete ready room, grabbing helmets and
			space packs as they race out the doors.

	117.  EXT. MASASSI OUTPOST - ATTACK RUNWAY

			Pilots and navigators dash in unison to a long line of wait-
			ing two-man starship fighters.  Around it, crews scurry
			here and there loading last minute armament and unlocking
			power couplings.  Luke, closely followed by Artoo and
			Threepio, meet Antilles in front of one of the sleek star-
			ships.

							ANTILLES
					This one's ours.  May THE FORCE
					OF OTHERS be with us.

			On a balcony overlooking the runway appears the dazzling
			figure of the Starkiller.  His long silver hair and beard
			cascade over his flowing white robes.  The Kiber Crystal
			glitters in his right hand.  The pilots and crews stop
			what they are doing and bow low toward the honored Jedi.
			Luke and the robots join the others in the tribute.  The
			air warriors are a wide mix of humans and other creatures
			from the many systems in the Alliance.

							THE STARKILLER
					Your next journey is marked by
					your given word.
					Do not falter, for there is no
					retreat from this battle.  The
					power of the Bogan is strong on
					the Death Star.  The Sith are
					many, but we hold the one power
					mightier than they: the Kiber
					Crystal.  It is your captain and
					your banner.  Do not fear to go
					where it leads.  THE FORCE IS WITH
					YOU.

			The pilots and crews bow and hurry to their starships. Luke
			helps Threepio lift Artoo into the ship.  PILOT LEADER, a
			rugged, handsome man in his forties, gives his ground crew
			the signal that he is starting his ion engine.  He has a
			winning smile and a distinctive scar along the side of his
			face.  His crew chief pats him on the back.

							CHIEF
					Knock them all the way back to
					Alderaan.

			The canopy is closed and the powerful starship moves onto
			the runway.  Luke and Antilles settle into their craft as
			their crew looks down the armament housing.

							CREWMAN
					I've got you about a thousand
					pounds lighter.  It should help.

			He hangs a small good-luck charm inside the cockpit as the
			main canopy starts to slide closed.  Luke and Antilles wave
			back to him.  Other crewmen say goodbye to their pilots,
			some grinning, some kidding -- all with a great deal of
			hidden emotion.  The din of retro-rockets cuts through the
			uproar, and six silver starships leave the runway and dis-
			appear into the morning cloud cover.

	118.  INT. MASASSI OUTPOST - WAR ROOM

			The Starkiller sits quietly before a giant computer display
			of the Yavin system.  It shows the planet, moons and approach-
			ing Death Star.  The Grande Mouff Tarkin stands behind the
			Jedi with several other Generals.

							TARKIN
					They're all away, sir.  For the
					first time since the take-over,
					I feel real hope.

							THE STARKILLER
					Put their com-links through the
					main system.  Let everyone hear
						it.

			General Dodana approaches the group and leans over to the
			Starkiller.

							DODANA
					They've made contact, sir.

	119.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN

			A small bright speck orbiting the huge green moon of Yavin
			sparkles in the light of the distant sun.  Six rebel star
			ships settle ominously into the foreground, moving swiftly
			toward the orbiting speck.  As the starships move closer,
			the awesome size of the gargantuan Imperial space fortress
			is revealed.  Explosions create blinding flashes on the
			planet's surface as the Imperial fortress bombards the moon
			with a fusillade of laser bolts.

	120.  INT. LEAD STARSHIP - TRAVELING

			Pilot Leader, in the first ship, signals to his navigator
			who sits in a small isolated glass bubble to the rear of
			the craft.  The many monitors are filled with various com-
			puter read-outs and displays.  Over the com-link one of
			the other starpilots reports to Pilot Leader.

							BOMA SIX (INTERCOM)
					Look at the size of that thing!

							PILOT LEADER
					Cut off, Boma Six.  Stand by.
					Bantha pack cover to the south.
					We'll try for the exhaust port.
					Settle in.  Here we go.

	121.  INT. LUKE'S STARSHIP - TRAVELING

			Luke adjusts the controls of the tiny starfighter and lowers
			the sunshade on his goggles.  Antilles and Threepio rotate
			around in the gun-pod.

							LUKE
					Does that glare bother you?

							ANTILLES
					I've got it blocked.  I'm all right.
					I wish they'd let us try for
					that exhaust port.

	122.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - BATTLE

			Fuel pods are jettisoned.  The starship fighters break off
			into a power-dive attack on the space fortress.  A barrage
			of laser fire from the huge fortress creates a wall of
			death, through which most of the rebel craft miraculously
			emerge, undamaged.  Multiple laser bolts streak from the
			starship fighters, creating small explosions on the complex
			surface of the fort.  Antilles directs his fire at one of
			the prime power terminals.  It explodes, generating weird
			electronic arcs that leap off the station's surface.

	123.  INT. IMPERIAL SPACE FORTRESS - MAIN STATION

			Walls buckle and cave in, sucking debris and personnel into
			the vacuum of space.  Alarm sirens scream as soldiers scram-
			ble to large turbo-powered laser gun emplacements.  Officers
			yell orders through the smoke and confusion.  Men and robots
			of various shapes and sizes run to their battle stations.
			Standing in the middle of the chaos, a vision of calm and
			foreboding, is the evil Sith knight: Darth Vader.  Several
			astro-officers run up to him, still putting on the helmets
			and equipment.

							VADER
					Get to your ships.  I'll take the
					lead myself.

	124.  INT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - MASASSI OUTPOST - WAR ROOM

			Generals and troops listen silently to the action of the
			starships over the com-link.  The Starkiller seems to be
			asleep, but no one attempts to waken him.

							PILOT LEADER (V.O.)
					Boma One to Massoni Base, we're
					nearing the north pole transmitter
					area.  The magnetic concussion is
					getting very rough.  We're start-
					ing our run.  Tighten it up.  Boma
					Two, tighten it up.  Watch those
					towers.

							BOMA TWO (CHEWIE)(V.O.)
					Heavy fire, Boss.  Twenty-three
					degrees.

							PILOT LEADER (V.O.)
					I see it.  Pull in.  Pull in.
					We're picking up some inter-
					ference.

							BOMA SIX (V.O.)
					Wow, I've never seen such fire
					power.

							PILOT LEADER (V.O.)
					Pull in, Boma Two.  Pull in.
					Chewie, do you read me?  Chewie?

							BOMA TWO (V.O.)
					I'm all right, Boss.  I've got
					a target. I'm going in to check
					it out.

							BOMA SIX (V.O.)
					There is too much action, Chewie.
					Get out!

							PILOT LEADER (V.O.)
					Break off, Chewie.  Acknowledge.
					We've hit too much interference.
					Boma Six, can you see Boma Two?

			The Starkiller's eyes open as the tension mounts.  He has
			not been asleep.

							BOMA SIX (V.O.)
					I've lost him. There's a heavy
					fire zone on this side.  My
					scanner's jammed.

							BOMA FIVE (V.O.)
					He's gone.  No, wait.  There he
					is.  Fin damage, but he's all right.

			A sigh of relief sweeps across the war room.  The computers
			flash off and then on again as the whole room shakes under
			the Death Star's bombardment of a nearby ridge.

							DEVIL FOUR (V.O.)
					Watch your back, Boss.  Watch
					your back!  A TIE squad above
					you, coming in -- about six ships.

	125.  EXT. SPACE AROUND FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - BATTLE - REBEL
			FIGHTERS (BOMA GROUP)

			Six fin winged Imperial fighters dive on Pilot Leader, but
			he does a quick spiral turn and eludes them.

							BOMA TWO (CHEWIE)(V.O.)
					I found the exhaust port, Boss.
					Relay target six degrees south by
					three mark two.  It's not very
					big -- a direct hit is going to
					be tough.

							PILOT LEADER
					I copy, Boma Two, but we have other
					problems right now.

			Pilot Leader and Boma Four dive in unison through a forest
			of radar domes, antennae and gun towers.  They are followed
			by four Imperial TIE fighters.  The two rebel ships make
			a sharp turn and come around behind the Imperial ships.
			Boma Four and Pilot Leader fire into the TIE fighters as
			the six ships criss-cross the surface of the fortress.

			Suddenly, a dense barrage of laser fire erupts from a pro-
			truding tower, catching Boma Four broadside.  The rebel
			spacecraft bursts into a million flaming pieces.  Pilot
			Leader reacts to the loss of his wing man with a renewed
			attack on the Imperial ships -- one of which falls away
			and hits a prime power terminal, creating an arching spec-
			tacle.  A chain reaction is set off, creating a series of
			explosions leaping across the surface of the fortress from
			terminal to terminal.

	126.  INT. LUKE'S STARSHIP - TRAVELING

			Luke and three other speedy little fighters dart back and
			forth across the soft underbelly of the fortress, leaving
			a trail of destruction behind them.  Artoo is sitting on
			the seat-back above Threepio's shoulders.  He is beeping
			and whistling frantically.  Threepio swings his gun pod
			around and begins firing at an approaching Imperial TIE
			ship.

							THREEPIO
					I see it.  I see it.  Don't confuse
					me, or we'll be killed.  See those?
					They break up in little pieces, just
					like a GS unit under pressure.

							ANTILLES
					Luke, TIE fighters below us.

							LUKE
					I see them.  Hang on!

			The rebel craft dives on the Imperial ships, all guns blast-
			ing away.  Two of the TIE craft go down in flames.

	127.  INT. IMPERIAL SPACE FORTRESS - MAIN CONTROL CENTER

			Constant explosions rock the interior of the fortress.
			Troops scurry for safety in the panic-ridden control center.
			A Sith knight speaks to Lord Vader on the com-link.

							SITH KNIGHT
					Yes, my Lord, the Ashla Force is
					strong upon us.  I can't hold the
					panic.  How could it be?

							VADER
					I feel the influence of the Kiber
					Crystal.  Perhaps the Starkiller
					is still alive They must have
					brought it out of hiding at last.
					We must strain -- counter the
					force.  Their attack is organized;
					they're going for the poles.  Con-
					centrate there.

	128.  EXT. REBEL STARSHIPS - BATTLE

			Boma Two (Chewie), a young hot-shot of about sixteen years,
			miraculously dives his ship through a virtual sea of laser
			fire and blasts the Imperial fighters into dust.  Chewie
			signals to his navigator, who lets out a whooping cheer
			as the craft veers into a victory roll.

							PILOT LEADER
					Great moves, Chewie.  Regroup at
					point two-four.  Let's go in for
					that exhaust port.  Coincide, Boma
					Six.

			Boma Five and Boma Three bob and weave in formation toward
			a group of giant towers at the north pole.

							PILOT LEADER (CONT'D)
					I see it.  It looks good.

							BOMA THREE
					I've got it.  We're hit!  We're hit!

							PILOT LEADER
					Eject...Eject.  Boma Three, do you
					read?

							BOMA THREE
					I'm all right.  I can hold it.
					Give me a little room, Boma Five.
					Watch it!  Watch it!

			Boma Three wobbles a little, then drops away sharply, plow-
			ing into a huge laser gun emplacement, causing a hideous
			series of chain reaction explosions.  The four remaining
			starships of the Boma group fly in a tight formation and
			dive between the tall towers near the exhaust port.

							PILOT LEADER
					Masassi Base, we're in position
					and starting for the target.
					Chewie, hold your fire until
					we're within point zero five
					four.  Make it count.

			Several ack-ack lasers begin to open fire on the approach-
			ing spacecraft.  The rebel ships direct their fire at a
			small, glowing blue hole at the base of one of the towers.
			Boma Five explodes, quickly followed by Boma Four.

							BOMA TWO (CHEWIE)
					I'm on it.

			Boma Two dives directly at the small target, is unable to
			pull out and crashes into the base of one of the towers.
			Pilot Leader dives between the towers, firing away, but is
			unable to hit the small hole.

							PILOT LEADER
					It's too small.  It's impossible.
					All ships hit.  Send in Bantha
					group.  I'll try to make it.

			One of the two large engines on Pilot Leader's fighter ex-
			plodes.  He careens wildly, leaving an erratic trail of
			smoke before eventually crashing into a solar panel.

	129.  INT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - MASSONI OUTPOST - WAR ROOM

			On the large computer display board, several of the markers
			indicating rebel fighters go dark.  General Dodana approaches
			the Starkiller in a hurry.

							DODONA
					Eighty-five percent of our craft
					have been destroyed.  The proba-
					bility projection shows little hope.
					Retreat is possible at this
					time, but not for long.

			Zavos steps forward in a panic.

							ZAVOS
					It's just like Ogana Major.
					Twice we have listened to
					this old man, and twice it
					has led to our ruin.  We
					must surrender before we're
					all destroyed, while there
					is still time.

			The Starkiller gives Zavos a hard look and the cowardly
			General shakes as if a cold wind had chilled him to his
			heart.

							THE STARKILLER
					There will be no surrender.
					There will be no retreat.
					This was settled.  The
					force is still with us.

			The General's eyes turn back to the big board as two more
			symbols disappear.  The four that are left are flying in
			formation toward the north pole exhaust port.

							DODONA
					There are only four left.

	130.  EXT. LUKE'S STARSHIP - BATTLE

			Luke swings the small craft around the many outcroppings
			of laser towers and transmitters.

							LUKE
					We'll follow you in Banta
					One.

							BANTA ONE
					Ship response through here
					is gone.  Don't try anything
					fancy.

							LUKE
					Antilles, Threepio, as soon as
					you've got the target, open up.

			The fortress gun emplacements fire away, hitting Banta
			Three.  It disintegrates, leaving a trail of flaming parti-
			cles.  The three remaining craft continue the assault.
			Luke and Antilles watch the remains of Banta Three disap-
			pear.

							BANTA  ONE
					This is it.  Make it count.

			The rebel craft blast away at the exhaust port, but all
			miss.

							THREEPIO
					Sir, I think if you pitched the
					ship about twelve degrees on the
					final approach, we could clear
					the port rim.  It seems to be
					diagonal, which is why we're off
					target.

							ANTILLES
					I think you're right.  Luke, tell
					Banta One when we make our next
					pass.

							LUKE
					Banta One, this is Banta Two...

	131.  EXT. IMPERIAL SPACE FORTRESS

			Lord Vader and two other Imperial ships wait for the rebel
			craft to emerge from the smoke and confusion of the exhaust
			port area.

							VADER
					We'll take what's left when they
					start their second run.  Prepare
					the scan ships for low altitude
					survey.  The Kiber Crystal will
					be ours if it's still down there.
					Stand by...Here they come.

	132.  EXT. BATTLE

			The three rebel starships bank and prepare for a second
			attack on the exhaust port.  Suddenly, streaking down from
			above them, the Imperial TIE craft blaze away with all their
			laser cannons.

			Banta Four instantly bursts into flames, then disintegrates.
			Banta One's tail section is hit, and the ship pinwheels
			toward the planet.  Blood covers Antilles' face.  Luke
			struggles to keep control of the ship.  Artoo is whistling
			wildly as Threepio swings the gun turret around to fire at
			the enemy craft.

							LUKE
					Antilles!

							ANTILLES
					The turret's shattered.  But
					both hatches are sealed.  I
					can hold out.  Just get us back
					down there.

							LUKE
					Well, it looks like we're it.

			The tiny rebel fighter dives toward the exhaust port, but
			is cut off and forced to turn away from Vader's ship.

							VADER
					This is the last one.  Here's
					where the rebellion ends.

			The three Imperial craft dive on the lone rebel starfighter.
			Laser bolts streak past the small craft on all sides.  Vader
			moves close in behind Luke's ship.

							THREEPIO
					Where did he go?I can't see him.

							ANTILLES
					He's back there somewhere.  Luke,
					bank a little...See him now?

			Vader signals his wing men to back off.

							VADER
					I've got him.  Return to base.

			Suddenly, Vader's wing man explodes into a shower of burn-
			ing fragments.  Vader is surprised and looks around for the
			cause of his wing man's misfortune.

							VADER (CONT'D)
					SR-2, do you see anything?  What
					did he hit?

			Before SR-2 can answer, he too is blasted out of orbit.
			Vader quickly veers off and takes defensive maneuvers. Above
			and behind the Imperial fighters the old familiar pirate
			starship descends into view.

	133.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP - COCKPIT - TRAVELING

			Han grins at Montross and speaks into the com-link.

							HAN
					I heard you were having some
					problems, Banta Two.

							LUKE (V.O.)
					I don't know what brought you
					back, but I'm sure glad you're
					here.

							HAN
					I'll cover you.  If you're going
					in there after something, you'd
					better get going.

	134.  EXT. BATTLE

			Luke dives the tiny ship once again into the wall of laser
			fire around the exhaust port.  The pirate ship follows a
			short distance behind, but begins to bounce about as it
			nears the generating tower.

							MONTROSS
					There is a terrible magnetic cross-
					field down here.  This thing's too
					big.  We'll never make it.

							LUKE
					Hold tight.  We're almost there.

			Vader's starship swoops down on the battered pirate ship,
			unleashing a heavy barrage of laser bolts.  Chewbacca in
			the rear gun turret blazes away at the Sith starship. One
			of Vader's huge solar fins breaks up, but the Black Knight
			manages to keep the disabled craft on course and crash dives
			into the pirate craft, exploding on impact.

							HAN
					We're hit.  You're on your own,
					Luke.

	135.  INT. PIRATE STARSHIP

			Han and Montross work their way through the damaged ship,
			looking for a usable life pod.  Chewbacca appears at the
			end of a hallway and yells at Han to follow him.

	136.  INT. LUKE'S STARSHIP

			Luke dives past the towers and approaches the exhaust port.

							LUKE
					I'm starting the bank.  Let
					her have it.

			The ship skims the surface of the Death Star, blasting a
			thin path across its surface.  As they pass the exhaust
			port, both Threepio and Antilles get several shots directly
			down the exhaust shaft.

							THREEPIO
					We hit it.  We hit it; perfect,
					if I do say so myself.

								ANTILLES
					Pull out of here, Luke.

	137.  EXT. BATTLE

			The small craft veers sharply away from the Death Star as
			ominous rumbles and explosions can be heard coming from
			within the huge super fortress.  The rebel ship speeds past
			the small lifepod from the pirate ship as it slowly drifts
			toward the green calm of Yavin's Fourth Moon.  Han, Montross
			and the furry Chewbacca watch the ominous fortress grow
			smaller as they drift further and further away.  Suddenly,
			a great flash replaces the fortress and rubble streaks past
			the lifepod and lone rebel starship.  Several giant explo-
			sions follow, until there is only a smoke cloud where the
			mighty fortress once orbited Yavin's Fourth Moon.

											DISSOLVE TO:

	138.  EXT. FOURTH MOON OF YAVIN - MASASSI OUTPOST

			Luke climbs out of the starship as a ground crew help the
			wounded Antilles from the shattered gun turret.  Artoo is
			helped down by Threepio.  Antilles gives Luke a big grin.
			Luke slaps Threepio on the back.  He then spots Han, Montross
			and Chewbacca riding up in a transport speeder.  Luke runs
			up and hugs the Corellian pirates.  They all laugh and cheer.

			The white-robed Starkiller approaches the group, followed by
			a hundred aides, troops, ground crews, and Generals.

			Antilles and the robots join Han, Luke and the others.  As
			the Starkiller approaches, they all bow low, including
			Chewbacca and the robots.

							THE STARKILLER
					Your achievement will be sung through
					the ages.  The Kiber Crystal has
					stopped the onslaught of the Bogan
					forces so that brave warriors can
					once again show their merit...The
					revolution has begun.

			A ROLL-UP TITLE appears:

					...And a thousand new systems joined the
					rebellion, causing a significant crack
					in the great wall of the powerful Galactic
					Empire.  The Starkiller would once again
					spark fear in the hearts of the Sith
					knights, but not before his sons were put
					to many tests...the most daring of which
					was the kidnapping of the Lars family,
					and the perilous search for:

							"The Princess of Ondos."

											FADE OUT:

											END CREDITS.


							 THE END
